.TH AMULE-VPN 1 "2026-06-21" "1.0" "sway dotfiles"
.SH NAME
amule-vpn \- run aMule inside a WireGuard network namespace tunneled through the selene VPS, bypassing Telmex CGNAT
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B amule-vpn
.RI [ ed2k-url ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The home uplink (Telmex) sits behind carrier-grade NAT: the router's WAN address
(10.150.85.148) is private and differs from the shared public address
(189.140.98.194), so no port-forward can give aMule a reachable port \[em] eD2k
stays LowID and Kad firewalled.
.PP
This system gives aMule a real public port by tunneling it through
.IR selene ,
a VPS with a routable public IP (187.124.234.236). aMule runs inside a dedicated
network namespace named
.I amule
whose only interface is a WireGuard link
.RI ( wg1 )
to selene. Outbound aMule traffic egresses as selene's IP, so eD2k servers see a
reachable address (HighID); selene DNATs the inbound eD2k/Kad ports back down the
tunnel. The namespace has no other route, making it a structural killswitch: if
the tunnel drops, aMule has no network at all and the real IP cannot leak.
.SH USAGE
.TP
.B amule-vpn
Launch aMule inside the namespace. Bound to
.I $mod+d
(rofi) through a desktop-entry override. Kills any plain root-namespace aMule
first, since the config is shared. The namespace itself is built at boot by
.IR amule-netns.service .
.TP
.B sudo systemctl restart amule-netns.service
Rebuild the namespace and tunnel if it wedges (the builder is idempotent).
.TP
.B sudo ip netns exec amule curl -s https://api.ipify.org
Health check: must print
.IR 187.124.234.236 .
.SH FILES
.SS "antares \[em] launcher and namespace"
.TP
.I ~/.scripts/amule-vpn
The launcher. Enters the
.I amule
netns, drops root to uid 1000 with
.BR setpriv (1),
re-injects the Wayland / PipeWire / D-Bus session sockets, and execs
.IR /usr/sbin/amule .
.TP
.I /usr/local/sbin/amule-netns-up
Idempotent builder: creates the netns, creates
.I wg1
in the root namespace then moves it into the netns, configures the peer, and
sets the default route via wg1 (the killswitch).
.TP
.I /usr/local/sbin/amule-netns-down
Teardown: kills aMule and deletes the netns, which auto-destroys
.IR wg1 .
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/amule-netns.service
Boot persistence: a oneshot with RemainAfterExit, ordered after
.IR network-online.target .
.TP
.I /etc/netns/amule/resolv.conf
DNS inside the netns (1.1.1.1), bind-mounted over /etc/resolv.conf by
.BR ip-netns (8).
.TP
.I /etc/wireguard/amule-antares.key
antares WireGuard private key; its pubkey is the selene peer.
.TP
.I /etc/sudoers.d/amule-netns
NOPASSWD for
.IR "/usr/bin/ip netns exec amule *" .
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/applications/org.amule.aMule.desktop
rofi / XDG override whose
.I Exec
points at the launcher, so
.I $mod+d
always starts the tunneled aMule. Shadows the system entry of the same name.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/applications/org.amule.aMule.gui.desktop
Hides
.B amulegui
with NoDisplay to avoid a confusing second entry.
.TP
.I ~/.aMule/amule.conf
aMule config: TCP 4662, UDP 4672, UPnPEnabled=0 (no gateway inside the netns),
bind address blank (it binds the only interface, 10.9.0.2).
.SS "selene \[em] tunnel server and port-forward"
.TP
.I /etc/wireguard/wg1.conf
WireGuard server: 10.9.0.1/24, ListenPort 51822, peer antares (10.9.0.2/32).
PostUp loads
.IR wg1.nft .
.TP
.I /etc/wireguard/wg1.nft
Dedicated
.I "inet wg_amule"
nft table: DNAT of tcp 4662 / udp 4672 / udp 4665 to 10.9.0.2, MASQUERADE of
10.9.0.0/24, and a TCP MSS clamp. Loaded by wg1 PostUp and deleted by PostDown,
so it never touches podman's
.I netavark
table.
.TP
.I /etc/nftables.conf
Host firewall (default-deny input). Carries the one added line
.IR "udp dport 51822 accept" ,
persisted by the enabled
.BR nftables.service .
.SH FLOW
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.B Outbound:
aMule (netns, source 10.9.0.2) to wg1, through the tunnel to selene, nft
MASQUERADE, out eth0 to the internet as 187.124.234.236. eD2k servers see a
reachable IP, granting HighID.
.IP \n+[step].
.B Inbound:
a peer hits selene:4662 on eth0, nft prerouting DNATs it to 10.9.0.2, it is
forwarded out wg1, through the tunnel into the netns, to aMule.
.IP \n+[step].
.B WireGuard socket:
wg1 is born in the root namespace, so its encrypted UDP socket stays there and
reaches selene over the Telmex route; only the cleartext interface lives in the
netns.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR wg (8),
.BR wg-quick (8),
.BR ip-netns (8),
.BR nft (8),
.BR setpriv (1),
.BR amule (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B wireguard-tools
Provides
.B wg
and
.B wg-quick
on both ends. The kernel datapath is in-tree.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Killswitch by construction.
With wg1 down the netns has no route \[em]
.I "ip netns exec amule ip route get 8.8.8.8"
returns "Network is unreachable". aMule never falls back to Telmex, so the real
IP cannot leak.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Single instance.
.I ~/.aMule
is shared, because a netns isolates the network and not the filesystem. Do not
run plain
.B amule
while the tunneled one is up; they fight over
.IR muleLock .
The launcher kills any plain instance first.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B The local IP is free to change.
antares connects out to selene's fixed endpoint, so a Telmex DHCP lease change
(for example .243 to .154) does not affect the tunnel. No DHCP reservation is
needed.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY must match the live socket
(wayland-1); the launcher hardcodes it. A wrong value fails with "Failed to
create wl_display".
.IP \[bu] 2
.B sudoers path.
The launcher calls
.I /usr/bin/ip
explicitly because the sudoers rule lists that exact path;
.I /usr/sbin/ip
is only a symlink and would not match.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B selene firewall.
Port 51822 must stay allowed in
.IR /etc/nftables.conf .
The DNATed eD2k ports are forwarded rather than delivered locally, so they need
no input rule.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B P2P egresses as selene's IP,
which also serves the client CRMs and the poste.io mail server \[em] a
reputation and abuse consideration, accepted knowingly.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Kad lag.
Kad flips from firewalled to ok about a minute after connecting, once an inbound
UDP probe completes.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
The tunnel auto-builds at boot through
.IR amule-netns.service ;
the GUI is launched on demand, so a GUI crash never tears down the tunnel.
.IP \[bu] 2
Full teardown: disable the service, run
.IR amule-netns-down ,
and remove the scripts, sudoers entry, and desktop overrides on antares; on
selene run
.I "wg-quick down wg1"
and drop the 51822 line from
.IR /etc/nftables.conf .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR amule (1),
.BR wg-quick (8),
.BR ip-netns (8),
.BR nft (8),
.BR wireguard (8)
