.TH CLIPBOARD\-FUNCTIONALITY 1 "2026\-06\-01" "dotfiles" "Clipboard Functionality Manual"
.SH NAME
clipboard\-functionality \- persistent clipboard history system for sway/waybar
.SH DESCRIPTION
The clipboard functionality provides a persistent, searchable clipboard history
manager for a sway/Wayland desktop environment.
.PP
Every clipboard change is captured, normalized (UTF\-16 LE is automatically
converted to UTF\-8 so browser\-copied URLs always appear clean), and stored
in a local SQLite database.
A waybar icon reflects the history size and provides click\-based access to the
history browser.
.PP
The history browser is a GTK 3 application
.RI ( clipboard\-picker.py )
with native multi\-select (shift/ctrl click, shift+arrows) for batch deletion and
a per\-row clickable pin. Pinned entries are stored outside the cliphist database,
so they survive clearing or purging the history, and appear in a "Fijados" section
at the top of the picker.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B $mod+Shift+p
Opens the interactive clipboard history browser (GTK picker).
.RS
.TP
.B Type
Filter the list live.
.TP
.B Click / Shift+Click / Ctrl+Click / Shift+Arrows
Select one or several rows (multi\-select).
.TP
.B Enter / Double\-click
Copy the activated row back to the clipboard and close. With multiple rows
selected, copy them all joined by newlines so a single
.B Ctrl+V
pastes the whole batch in order.
.TP
.B Delete
Delete all selected rows (batch). With nothing selected, deletes nothing.
.TP
.B Click the pin icon
Pin or unpin that row. Pinned rows move to the "Fijados" section on top.
.TP
.B Escape
Close the picker.
.RE
.TP
.B Waybar left\-click
Opens the clipboard history browser (GTK picker).
.TP
.B Waybar right\-click
Opens a standalone deletion picker (rofi) for removing individual items.
.TP
.B Waybar middle\-click
Clears the entire cliphist history. Pinned items survive (stored separately).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/clipboard\-manager.sh
Thin launcher that execs
.IR clipboard\-picker.py .
Kept as the stable entry point so waybar, eww and the keybind need no changes.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/clipboard\-picker.py
GTK 3 history browser \(em the actual picker UI.
Per\-row clickable pin, native multi\-select delete, and live filter; themes itself
via embedded CSS and renders as a centered gtk\-layer\-shell overlay.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/clipboard\-pins/
Pin store: per pin, one content file
.RB ( <hash> ,
named by a sha256 prefix of the content) plus a
.RB ( <hash>.pv )
preview sidecar.
Lives outside the cliphist DB, so pins survive history clears.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/clipboard\-utf16\-filter.py
Storage middleware.
Converts UTF\-16 LE clipboard data (e.g. URLs copied from Brave) to UTF\-8
before handing off to cliphist store.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/clipboard\-store\-daemon.sh
Daemon launcher for the storage pipeline.
Kills any existing
.B wl\-paste \-\-watch clipboard\-utf16\-filter.py
instance then starts a fresh one.
Called by
.B exec_always $cliphist_store
in
.IR 99\-autostart\-applications.conf .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/clipboard\-watch\-daemon.sh
Daemon launcher for the waybar refresh signal.
Kills any existing
.B wl\-paste \-\-watch waybar\-signal clipboard
instance then starts a fresh one.
Called by
.B exec_always $cliphist_watch
in
.IR 99\-autostart\-applications.conf .
.TP
.I ~/.config/rofi/themes/coffee\-metal
Rofi theme for the standalone deletion dialog
.RB ( $clipboard\-del ,
the waybar right\-click).
The GTK picker themes itself via embedded CSS instead.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Waybar module definition
.RI ( custom/clipboard ,
signal\ 9).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/autostart
Daemon variable definitions:
.BR $cliphist_store ", " $cliphist_watch ", " $clip\-persist .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01\-definitions.conf
User\-facing variable definitions:
.BR $clipboard ", " $clipboard\-del .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/99\-autostart\-applications.conf
Launches the three clipboard daemons at sway startup.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/shutdown
Purges clipboard history on logout/shutdown/reboot (if configured).
.TP
.I ~/.cache/cliphist/db
SQLite database storing clipboard history (managed by cliphist).
.SH PROGRAMS
The following programs must be installed for this functionality to work:
.TP
.B cliphist
Clipboard history backend.
Stores and retrieves entries from the SQLite database.
.TP
.B wl\-paste
Wayland clipboard reader.
Used in
.B \-\-watch
mode to monitor clipboard changes.
.TP
.B wl\-copy
Wayland clipboard writer.
Restores a selected history entry to the active clipboard.
.TP
.B wl\-clip\-persist
Keeps clipboard data alive after the source application closes,
preventing "clipboard lost on window close".
.TP
.B waybar\-signal
IPC utility.
Sends POSIX signal RTMIN+9 to waybar to refresh the clipboard module.
.TP
.B python (PyGObject, GTK 3)
Runtime for the GTK history picker
.RB ( clipboard\-picker.py ).
.TP
.B gtk\-layer\-shell
Positions the GTK picker as a centered overlay on the Wayland layer.
.TP
.B rofi
Launcher used by the standalone deletion picker
.RB ( $clipboard\-del ,
the waybar right\-click).
.SH DAEMONS
Three background processes run continuously,
all started by
.I 99\-autostart\-applications.conf
at sway startup:
.TP
.B wl\-paste \-\-watch clipboard\-utf16\-filter.py
Monitors the Wayland clipboard.
On each change, pipes the raw data through the UTF\-16 filter to
.BR "cliphist store" .
Started via
.B $cliphist_store
in autostart.
.TP
.B wl\-paste \-\-watch waybar\-signal\ clipboard
Monitors the Wayland clipboard.
On each change, signals waybar to refresh the clipboard icon and tooltip.
Started via
.B $cliphist_watch
in autostart.
.TP
.B wl\-clip\-persist \-\-clipboard regular ...
Persists clipboard data after the source application closes.
Started via
.B $clip\-persist
in autostart
.RI ( exec_always ,
so it restarts on sway reload).
.SH STORAGE
Clipboard history is stored in
.IR ~/.cache/cliphist/db
(SQLite format, managed by cliphist).
.PP
Maximum items: 750 (cliphist default).
.PP
The database is purged automatically on logout, shutdown, and reboot if the
variable
.B $purge_cliphist_logout
is set to
.I true
in your sway configuration.
.PP
It can also be cleared manually via middle\-click on the waybar clipboard icon,
or by running:
.PP
.RS
.B rm \-f ~/.cache/cliphist/db
.RE
.PP
Pinned items are stored separately in
.I ~/.local/share/clipboard\-pins/
and are
.B not
affected by clearing or purging the history.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.TP
.B Max history size
Pass
.B \-max\-items <n>
to
.B cliphist store
by editing
.B $cliphist_store
in
.IR ~/.config/sway/autostart .
.TP
.B Purge on logout
Set
.B $purge_cliphist_logout
to
.I true
in your sway config.
.TP
.B Picker appearance
The GTK picker themes itself via the embedded CSS in
.IR clipboard\-picker.py .
The standalone deletion dialog uses
.IR ~/.config/rofi/themes/coffee\-metal .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cliphist (1),
.BR wl\-paste (1),
.BR wl\-copy (1),
.BR wl\-clip\-persist (1),
.BR rofi (1),
.BR waybar (5)
