.TH CLIPARDO 1 "2026\-06\-09" "dotfiles" "Clipardo Manual"
.SH NAME
clipardo \- copy file contents to the clipboard wrapped in Markdown code fences
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clipardo
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ FILE | DIR " ...]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clipardo
reads one or more files (optionally recursing into directories), filters out
binary and git\-ignored files, and copies everything to the Wayland clipboard
as a sequence of Markdown blocks. Each file is emitted as its location line
followed by a fenced code block tagged with the language inferred from the
file extension:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/path/to/file.py
\(ga\(ga\(ga python
print("hi")

\(ga\(ga\(ga
.fi
.RE
.PP
The format is designed for pasting source files into LLM chats and Markdown
documents. With
.B \-\-content\-only
the location line is omitted and only the fenced contents are copied.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-recursive
Recurse into directories. With no arguments at all,
.B \-r
defaults to the current directory.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Include hidden files (dotfiles). Two behaviors depending on mode: combined
with
.B \-r
it includes hidden files while recursing (without
.B \-a
anything starting with a dot is skipped); without
.B \-r
it appends the first\-level dotfiles of each input's
.B parent directory
\[em] so
.B "clipardo \-a foo.md"
copies
.I foo.md
plus every dotfile living next to it. Typical use:
.B "clipardo \-ra ."
to copy a whole project including
.IR .gitignore ,
.IR .env.example ,
etc.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-content\-only
Copy only the fenced file contents, omitting the location line above each
fence. Combinable with the other flags
.RB ( "clipardo \-rc ." ).
Added 2026\-06\-09.
.SH USAGE
.nf
clipardo notes.md            # location + fenced content
clipardo \-c notes.md         # fenced content only, no location
clipardo \-r src/             # every text file under src/, recursively
clipardo \-rc .               # whole project, no locations
clipardo \-ra .               # whole project including dotfiles
.fi
.SH FILES
.SS Scripts
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/clipardo
The entire functionality \[em] a single self\-contained bash script. Tracked in
the dotfiles bare repo as
.IR .scripts/clipardo .
.SS Configuration / units / state
None. The script is stateless: no config file, no systemd unit, no cache. The
only transient artifact is a
.BR mktemp (1)
file removed on exit.
.SH "DATA PIPELINE"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Parse flags
.RB ( getopts
with manual long\-option emulation via
.BR \-: ).
.IP \n+[step].
Collect inputs: plain files directly; directories only when
.B \-r
is given, by parsing
.B ls \-1pR
output.
.IP \n+[step].
With
.B \-a
but without
.BR \-r ,
first\-level dotfiles of each input's parent directory are appended.
.IP \n+[step].
Filter git\-ignored files: inside a git work\-tree via
.BR "git check\-ignore" ;
outside one, a
.I .gitignore
in the current directory is pattern\-matched manually.
.IP \n+[step].
Keep only text\-like files: extension whitelist (ts, tsx, js, jsx, json, css,
html, md, sh, py, c, cpp, go, rs, java, xml, toml, yaml, ...) first, then
.B file \-\-mime\-type
for everything else (accepts text/*, application/json|xml|x\-shellscript).
.IP \n+[step].
Failsafe: more than 100 files prompts for confirmation
.RI ( MAX_FILES ).
.IP \n+[step].
Format each file into a temp file \[em] location line (skipped with
.BR \-c )
+ opening fence with language tag + contents + closing fence \[em] then pipe
the whole batch into the first available clipboard tool.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR wl\-copy (1)
(fallback
.BR xclip (1),
then
.BR xsel (1)),
.BR file (1),
.BR git (1),
.BR ls (1),
.BR mktemp (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B wl\-clipboard
Provides
.BR wl\-copy ,
the Wayland clipboard writer actually used on this system.
.TP
.B file
MIME\-type detection for extensions outside the whitelist. Optional: without
it the script falls back to a binary\-extension blacklist.
.TP
.B git
Optional \[em] only used to honor ignore rules inside a work\-tree.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
A directory argument without
.B \-r
is
.B silently skipped
\[em] no warning, and if it was the only argument the script exits with
"No files to copy."
.IP \[bu] 2
.B \-a
without
.B \-r
appends first\-level dotfiles from the
.B parent directory of each input
.RB ( dirname ),
which can pull in dotfiles you did not expect when passing files from
another directory.
.IP \[bu] 2
The manual
.I .gitignore
matching (used only outside a git work\-tree) is a simplified glob match: no
negation
.RB ( ! )
patterns, no anchoring semantics. Inside a work\-tree the real
.B git check\-ignore
runs per file.
.IP \[bu] 2
Binary files are dropped
.B silently
\[em] a copied batch may contain fewer files than passed.
.IP \[bu] 2
Recursion parses
.B ls \-1pR
output line by line: spaces in filenames are fine, but a filename containing a
newline would corrupt the parse.
.IP \[bu] 2
The opening fence is written as
.B "\(ga\(ga\(ga lang"
(space between backticks and tag); for unknown extensions the tag is empty,
leaving a trailing space. Each file's contents also gain one trailing newline
before the closing fence.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B \-\-content\-only
keeps the Markdown fences \[em] it only removes the location line. There is no
raw (fence\-less) mode.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Invoked manually from the shell; no keybinding. Listed in the cheatsheet
overlay (Super+/) right column.
.IP \[bu] 2
Found via
.B PATH
because
.I $HOME/.scripts
precedes the system paths.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR clipboard\-functionality (1),
.BR wl\-copy (1),
.BR file (1),
.BR git\-check\-ignore (1)
