.TH DO-NOT-DISTURB 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
do-not-disturb \- notification suppression toggle with waybar indicator for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The do-not-disturb module toggles
.BR mako (1)'s
.B do-not-disturb
mode, which makes all desktop notifications invisible while active.
A state file keeps the waybar indicator in sync with mako's actual mode across
status queries.
.SH WAYBAR MODULE
The
.B custom/dnd
module uses signal 11 and the format string
.BR \(dq{}{icon}\(dq :
the
.B {}
placeholder renders the
.I alt
field (empty in default mode, the text
.B dnd
in DND mode) immediately before the icon, producing a visible label when
notifications are suppressed.
.TP
.B Default mode
Alt text: (empty). Icon: bell icon. Tooltip: "mode: default".
.TP
.B DND active
Alt text:
.BR dnd .
Icon: muted bell icon. Tooltip: "mode: do-not-disturb".
.PP
CSS:
.B #custom-dnd
is part of a shared padding group with other modules. No state-specific
color rules are defined.
.PP
Click bindings:
.TP
.B Left click
Runs
.B dnd.sh toggle
then sends
.B waybar-signal dnd
(signal 11) to refresh the indicator.
.TP
.B Right click
Runs
.BR "dnd.sh restore" ,
clearing all mako modes and returning to default.
.SH SCRIPT
.B dnd.sh
manages mako's
.B do-not-disturb
mode via
.BR makoctl (1).
On each invocation, if
.I ~/.cache/dnd_state
does not exist it is created by querying
.BR "makoctl mode" .
.SS status
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Queries
.B makoctl mode
for the real current state and checks for the string
.BR do-not-disturb .
.IP \n+[step].
Writes
.B dnd
or
.B default
to
.IR ~/.cache/dnd_state .
.IP \n+[step].
Reads the state file and outputs JSON for waybar:
.PP
.RS
.EX
{"alt":"default|dnd","tooltip":"mode: default|do-not-disturb"}
.EE
.RE
.SS toggle
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Reads the current state from
.IR ~/.cache/dnd_state .
.IP \n+[step].
If
.BR dnd :
runs
.B makoctl mode -r do-not-disturb
and writes
.B default
to the state file.
.IP \n+[step].
If
.BR default :
runs
.B makoctl mode -a do-not-disturb
and writes
.B dnd
to the state file.
.PP
The waybar signal (11) is sent by the
.B on-click
binding in the waybar module config, not by the script itself.
.SS restore
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Runs
.BR "makoctl restore" ,
which clears
.I all
active mako modes (not just do-not-disturb) and returns to default.
.IP \n+[step].
Writes
.B default
to
.IR ~/.cache/dnd_state .
.SH MAKO INTEGRATION
.I ~/.config/mako/config
defines the mode rule that makes DND effective:
.PP
.RS
.EX
[mode=do-not-disturb]
invisible=1
.EE
.RE
.PP
When mako is in this mode, notifications are fully suppressed \(em they do not
appear at all, as opposed to merely being silenced.
.PP
The same file configures the visual appearance of notifications in default mode:
.TP
.B Position
Bottom-right of the screen.
.TP
.B Font
JetBrainsMono NF 10.
.TP
.B Timeout
None (notifications persist until dismissed by the user).
.TP
.B Background
.B #141a1b90
(semi-transparent dark).
.TP
.B Border
None. Border radius: 15 px.
.SH NOTES
.I ~/.cache/dnd_state
is a runtime file and should not be tracked in git.
.PP
.B makoctl restore
differs from
.B "makoctl mode -r do-not-disturb"
in that it resets
.I all
active modes at once, not just the DND mode.
.PP
The waybar signal (SIGRTMIN+11) is sent by the
.B on-click
entry in
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
via
.BR waybar-signal ,
not from within
.IR dnd.sh .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Defines the
.B custom/dnd
module: signal 11, format string, format-icons, and click bindings.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/style.css
CSS for
.BR #custom-dnd :
shared padding group with other modules.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/dnd.sh
Toggle, status, and restore subcommands. Manages the state file and calls
.BR makoctl (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/mako/config
Mako notification daemon configuration. Defines the
.B [mode=do-not-disturb]
rule with
.B invisible=1
and the default notification appearance.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/dnd_state
Cached mode state
.RB ( dnd
or
.BR default ).
Runtime file \(em not tracked in git.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR mako (1),
.BR makoctl (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mako (1),
.BR makoctl (1)
