.TH DROP-ZONE 1 "2026-03-21" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
drop-zone \- auto-sync local directory to selene VPS via SSH
.SH DESCRIPTION
Drop Zone provides a local directory that automatically syncs its contents
to the selene VPS. Any file or directory placed in
.I ~/shared/selene/
is transferred to
.I selene:~/shared/
within seconds, event-driven via
.BR inotifywait (1).
.PP
A floating terminal monitor shows real-time transfer progress and
completion status.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/shared/selene/
Local drop zone directory. Anything placed here syncs to selene automatically.
.TP
.I ~/.scripts/sync-to-selene.sh
Core sync script. Watches the drop zone with
.BR inotifywait (1)
for file events (close_write, moved_to, delete), then runs
.BR rsync (1)
to push changes. Logs progress to
.IR /tmp/sync-selene.log .
Sends a
.BR notify-send (1)
notification on completion.
.TP
.I ~/.scripts/sync-selene-monitor.sh
Toggle script for the monitor window. If the monitor is already open,
focuses it. Otherwise, spawns a
.BR foot (1)
terminal with app-id
.B sync-selene
running
.BR tail (1)
on the log file.
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/sync-selene.service
Systemd user service that runs
.I sync-to-selene.sh
on login. Restarts on failure.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/98-application-defaults.conf
Contains the
.B for_window
rule that makes the sync-selene monitor float at 600x300.
.TP
.I /tmp/sync-selene.log
Live log file. Each transfer shows timestamp, filename, rsync progress,
and completion time.
.SH USAGE
.SS Syncing files
Simply copy, move, or create files in
.IR ~/shared/selene/ .
They appear at
.I ~/shared/
on selene within seconds. Deleting a file locally also deletes it
remotely (rsync \-\-delete).
.SS Monitoring progress
.IP \(bu 2
Run
.B sync-selene-monitor.sh
to open a floating terminal with live progress.
.IP \(bu 2
Move the monitor to scratchpad with your keybind to keep it accessible
but out of the way.
.IP \(bu 2
Completion notifications appear via
.BR notify-send (1).
.SS Service management
.RS
.nf
systemctl \-\-user status sync-selene
systemctl \-\-user restart sync-selene
systemctl \-\-user stop sync-selene
.fi
.RE
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR inotifywait (1),
.BR rsync (1),
.BR ssh (1),
.BR foot (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR swaymsg (1)
.SH FLOW
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
File lands in
.I ~/shared/selene/
.IP \n+[step].
.BR inotifywait (1)
detects close_write/moved_to/delete event
.IP \n+[step].
.BR rsync (1)
pushes changes to
.I selene:~/shared/
with progress logging
.IP \n+[step].
Log entry written to
.I /tmp/sync-selene.log
(visible in monitor window)
.IP \n+[step].
.BR notify-send (1)
displays completion notification
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B Direction
Local \[->] selene only. This is not bidirectional sync.
.TP
.B Network dependency
If the network is down when a file is dropped, rsync fails silently and
the file will sync on the next file event. The service does not retry
on its own.
.TP
.B SSH config
Uses the
.B selene
host alias from
.I ~/.ssh/config
(symlinked from
.IR ~/.secrets/ssh/config ).
Authentication is via SSH key in BatchMode.
