.TH EMOJI-PICKER 1 "2026-05-05" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
emoji-picker \- tabbed emoji picker for sway with keyword aliases
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emoji-picker
.PP
Bound to
.B $mod+period
in the default sway mode. Accepts no arguments.
.SH DESCRIPTION
A rofi-based emoji picker built on top of
.BR bemoji (1)
data and
.BR wl-ime-type (1)
for input. Eleven category tabs are switched with
.B Right
and
.BR Left :
.IR Recent ", " Kaomoji ", " Faces ", " People ", " Animals ", " Food ", "
.IR Travel ", " Activities ", " Objects ", " Symbols ", " Flags .
On
.BR Enter ,
the focused entry is typed into whichever Wayland window had focus before
the picker opened.
.PP
The
.I Recent
tab merges history (most-recent first) with the full emoji set (excluding
kaomoji) so a single view can be searched after warming up. History is
appended to
.I ~/.local/state/bemoji-history.txt
on each successful selection; the last
.B 50
entries are surfaced.
.SH KEYBINDING
.TP
.B $mod+period
Launch the picker. Defined in
.IR ~/.config/sway/modes/default ,
dispatched via
.B $emoji_picker
to
.IR ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-picker .
.SH SEARCH METADATA
Each emoji can be tagged with extra search keywords that the rofi filter
matches but never displays. Typing
.B surprised
surfaces every face flagged as such, typing
.B poker
surfaces the playing-card suits and the slot machine, typing
.B yeehaw
surfaces the cowboy face, and so on.
.PP
Two source files contribute to the same emoji \(rA keywords map; both are
TAB-separated and use
.B #
followed by whitespace as comment marker.
.B emoji-modi-handler
re-reads them on every picker launch, so edits take effect immediately
\(em no sway reload required.
.SS Cluster aliases
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-aliases.txt
\(em one cluster per line, keyword first:
.PP
.RS
.EX
keyword<TAB>emoji emoji emoji ...
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use this when one keyword should surface many emojis (e.g.
.BR lol " \(rA " "all laughing faces" ).
.SS Per-emoji keywords
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-keywords.txt
\(em one emoji per line, synonyms after:
.PP
.RS
.EX
<emoji><TAB>keyword keyword keyword ...
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use this when one emoji needs broader search vocabulary (e.g.
.BR \(lq lmao \(rq " \(rA " 😂).
The file ships with ~545 entries auto-generated from
.I /usr/share/oh-my-zsh/plugins/emoji/gemoji_db.json
(CLDR aliases + tags) and ~890 hand-curated additions covering every
emoji in the user's data set. The same emoji may appear on multiple lines
\(em the handler merges all occurrences.
.SS Injection mechanism
The handler emits each row through the rofi script-mode
.B meta
field (see
.BR rofi-script (5)),
appended as
.PP
.RS
.EX
<display>\\0meta\\x1f<merged keywords>
.EE
.RE
.PP
The display column is unchanged; extra keywords are invisible to the eye
but participate in the fuzzy match.
.SH SCRIPT
.B emoji-picker
launches rofi with one mode per category, each mode delegated to
.B emoji-modi-handler
in script mode.
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
On
.B ROFI_RETV=0
(initial render of a tab),
.B emoji-modi-handler
emits the category file \(em or, for
.IR Recent ,
a deduplicated merge of history and the full set \(em piped through
.BR inject_meta ,
which appends the
.B meta
column to each row from the merged cluster + per-emoji map.
.IP \n+[step].
On
.B ROFI_RETV=1
or
.B 2
(user selected an entry), the handler writes the selected display text to
.I /tmp/emoji-picker-selection
and exits, closing rofi.
.IP \n+[step].
After rofi exits,
.B emoji-picker
reads the selection file, extracts the leading emoji glyph, and pipes it
to
.BR wl-ime-type (1)
to be typed into the previously focused Wayland surface. The full line is
appended to the history file for the
.I Recent
tab.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-picker
Entry point. Builds the rofi command, runs it, and types the selection.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-modi-handler
Per-tab script-mode handler. Loads aliases, emits emoji rows with meta.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-aliases.txt
Cluster aliases (one keyword \(rA many emojis). User-editable.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/emoji-keywords.txt
Per-emoji search synonyms (one emoji \(rA many keywords). User-editable.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/rofi-emoji-picker
Wrapper around the compact rofi theme for ad-hoc invocations (not used by
the tabbed picker).
.TP
.I ~/.config/rofi/themes/emoji-picker.rasi
Compact rofi theme: 600 px wide, accent-bordered, tabbed.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/bemoji/categories/*.txt
Emoji data (faces, people, animals, food, travel, activities, objects,
symbols, flags, kaomoji). Provided by the
.BR bemoji (1)
package.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/bemoji-history.txt
Selection history. The
.I Recent
tab reads the last 50 entries.
.TP
.I /tmp/emoji-picker-selection
Single-shot file used to pass the selection from the handler back to
.BR emoji-picker .
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.BR bemoji (1),
.BR rofi (1),
.BR wl-ime-type (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bemoji (1),
.BR rofi (1),
.BR rofi-script (5),
.BR wl-ime-type (1)
