.TH EMU 1 "2026-07-05" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
emu \- fleet of Android emulators with Google Play for multi-account app testing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emu
.I n
.br
.B emu
[\fB\-l\fR|\fB\-\-list\fR]
.br
.B emu \-c
.IR n | a\-b
.br
.B emu \-k
.IR n | all
.br
.B emu \-w
.I n
.br
.B emu \-h
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B emu
manages a fleet of Android Virtual Devices named
.IR tester\-01 " through " tester\-NN ,
each a full Android 16 (API 36) phone with the certified Google Play Store,
so every device can sign in to its own Google account and enroll as a tester
for apps under development (Play Console closed testing).
.PP
Each AVD maps to a deterministic adb port,
.RI "port = 5554 + 2\[mu](" n "\-1),"
so
.I tester\-01
is always serial
.IR emulator\-5554 ,
.I tester\-02
is
.IR emulator\-5556 ,
and so on \[em] stable targets for adb scripting.
.PP
The bare argument is always the device number (house CLI convention):
.B emu 3
starts
.IR tester\-03 .
Operations are dashed flags. Every command prints feedback; nothing is silent.
.SH USAGE
.TP
.B emu \-c 1\-15
Create the fleet (idempotent; existing AVDs are left untouched and reported).
.TP
.B emu 1
Start
.I tester\-01
in a phone window. First boot takes 1\-2 minutes; after a clean shutdown a
quickboot snapshot makes later boots take seconds. Sign in to the device's
Google account through the normal Android setup, then open the Play Console
opt\-in link in the device browser to enroll that account as a tester; the
app under test then appears in that device's Play Store.
.TP
.B emu \-k 1
Shut down cleanly (this is what saves the quickboot snapshot).
.TP
.B emu \-w 1
Boot with factory reset \[em] wipes apps, account, and data of that device
for a from\-scratch test run. Refuses to run while the device is up.
.SH FILES
.SS Scripts
.TP
.I ~/.scripts/emu
The fleet CLI (bash). Holds the image/profile constants
.RI ( "system\-images;android\-36;google_apis_playstore;x86_64" ,
.IR medium_phone ),
per\-AVD RAM (2048 MB), and the RAM warning threshold (3000 MB).
.SS Configuration
.TP
.I ~/.config/fish/conf.d/android\-sdk.fish
Exports
.BR ANDROID_HOME / ANDROID_SDK_ROOT
and adds cmdline\-tools, platform\-tools, and emulator to fish's PATH.
Needed because fish does not read
.IR /etc/profile.d .
.TP
.I /etc/profile.d/android\-sdk\-cmdline\-tools.sh
Same environment for POSIX shells; shipped by the AUR package.
.TP
.I ~/.android/avd/tester\-NN.avd/config.ini
Per\-device hardware config. Created by
.B emu \-c
and patched:
.IR hw.ramSize=2048 ,
.IR hw.keyboard=yes
(host keyboard for typing passwords),
.IR disk.dataPartition.size=8G ,
.IR hw.gpu.mode=auto .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/98\-application\-defaults.conf
Holds the sway rule \fIfor_window [class=\[dq]Emulator\[dq]] floating
enable\fR, so the device window and the extended\-controls panel are born
floating, not tiling. Applied live with
.B swaymsg
\[em] a full reload can drop the waybar.
.SS SDK binaries
.TP
.I /opt/android\-sdk/emulator/emulator
QEMU\-based emulator, installed and updated by sdkmanager (v36.6.11 at forge time).
.TP
.I /opt/android\-sdk/platform\-tools/adb
The only adb on the system (deliberately \[em] see GOTCHAS).
.TP
.I /opt/android\-sdk/cmdline\-tools/latest/bin/
.BR avdmanager " and " sdkmanager
(create AVDs; install/update SDK components).
.SS Data & state
.TP
.I ~/.android/avd/tester\-NN.avd/
Everything the device owns: userdata image, quickboot snapshots, config.
Grows to roughly 4\-5 GB per device with apps installed.
.TP
.I /opt/android\-sdk/system\-images/android\-36/google_apis_playstore/x86_64/
The system image, shared read\-only by all 15 devices.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/emu/tester\-NN.log
Emulator stdout/stderr per device, overwritten on each start.
.SS "Working directory"
.TP
.I ~/work/emu\-fleet/
Curated operational workspace (mode 700), separate from the app state in
.IR ~/.local/share/emu/ .
Not tracked by any git repo.
.TP
.I ~/work/emu\-fleet/accounts.md
Table mapping each device to its identity, Google email, password, and
status (mode 600). Holds passwords in cleartext \[em] never copy to a repo.
Populated as each account is created.
.SH FLOW
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.B emu \-c
.I n
\[->]
.B avdmanager
creates the AVD from the Play Store image with the
.I medium_phone
profile \[->] config.ini is patched (RAM, keyboard, data size, GPU).
.IP \n+[step].
.B emu
.I n
\[->] checks the AVD exists, is not already running, and warns if available
RAM is under 3 GB \[->] launches
.B emulator
detached on the device's fixed port \[->] QEMU boots Android under KVM
(~25 s first boot, seconds from snapshot) \[->] the window maps in sway via
XWayland with class
.IR Emulator .
.IP \n+[step].
The adb server discovers
.IR emulator\-PORT ;
.B emu \-l
reports it as running.
.IP \n+[step].
.B emu \-k
.I n
\[->]
.B adb emu kill
\[->] clean shutdown saves the quickboot snapshot.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR emulator " (qemu\-system\-x86_64),"
.BR adb ,
.BR avdmanager ,
.BR awk / sed / grep
(config patching and RAM checks).
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B android\-sdk\-cmdline\-tools\-latest
AUR (21.0\-1). Bootstraps the SDK: provides sdkmanager and avdmanager under
.IR /opt/android\-sdk .
.TP
.B SDK components (installed by sdkmanager, not pacman)
.IR emulator ,
.IR platform\-tools ,
.IR "system\-images;android\-36;google_apis_playstore;x86_64" .
Update with
.BR "sdkmanager \-\-update" .
.TP
.B java\-runtime
OpenJDK (via java\-runtime\-common); sdkmanager and avdmanager are Java tools.
.SH "HARDWARE NOTES"
.IP \[bu] 2
Acceleration via KVM
.RI ( /dev/kvm );
measured first boot 25 s on the i7\-6820HQ.
.IP \[bu] 2
Each running device costs ~2.5 GB of real RAM. With 15 GB total: 3
concurrent devices with the browser closed, 1\-2 with Brave open. The script
warns below 3 GB available but does not block.
.IP \[bu] 2
The 15 devices exist as AVDs on disk; concurrency is the only limit \[em]
run in batches and rotate.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
The Play Store image tag is
.IR google_apis_playstore ,
not
.IR google_play .
Grepping sdkmanager listings for the latter finds nothing.
.IP \[bu] 2
There is deliberately ONE adb on the system (the SDK's platform\-tools).
Installing
.B android\-tools
from the repos adds a second adb whose version mismatch kills and restarts
the adb server on every alternate use.
.IP \[bu] 2
.I /opt/android\-sdk
was chown'd to the user (single\-user pragmatism; the android\-sdk group
alternative requires re\-login). An AUR package update returns
.I cmdline\-tools/
to root ownership \[em] benign, pacman manages that subtree; everything
sdkmanager installed stays user\-owned.
.IP \[bu] 2
The emulator window is XWayland with
.B class
.IR Emulator ,
not a native Wayland app_id \[em] sway criteria must use
.IR [class="Emulator"] ,
and in
.B swaymsg \-t get_tree
it appears under
.IR window_properties.class .
.IP \[bu] 2
Quickboot snapshots are saved only on clean shutdown
.RB ( "emu \-k"
/
.BR "adb emu kill" ).
Killing the qemu process discards the session state.
.IP \[bu] 2
Google accounts for the fleet must be created spaced out over days, not in a
burst \[em] burst creation from one IP triggers phone verification per
account and early suspensions. The residential (CGNAT) IP is better standing
for signups than a datacenter VPS exit; do not route the fleet through the
VPS for this.
.IP \[bu] 2
Tester enrollment (Play Console closed testing) is a web opt\-in link \[em]
it can be opened in the device browser or any browser where that account is
signed in; the app then appears in that device's Play Store.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Nothing starts at boot or login; devices launch on demand and their state
persists on disk between sessions.
.IP \[bu] 2
Removing the feature entirely:
.IR ~/.scripts/emu ,
.IR ~/.config/fish/conf.d/android\-sdk.fish ,
.IR ~/.android/avd/ ,
.IR ~/.local/share/emu/ ,
then
.B pacman \-R android\-sdk\-cmdline\-tools\-latest
and delete
.IR /opt/android\-sdk .
.IP \[bu] 2
Emulators are stock AOSP/Pixel\-style Android \[em] a bug that depends on a
vendor skin (Motorola MyUX, Samsung One UI) will not reproduce here.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B emu \-h
for the built\-in summary. Official emulator CLI reference:
.UR https://developer.android.com/studio/run/emulator\-commandline
.UE
