.TH GAMMA-CORRECTION 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gamma-correction \- location-based color temperature adjustment with waybar indicator for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The gamma correction module controls
.BR wlsunset (1),
a Wayland color temperature daemon that shifts the display toward warmer tones at
night to reduce eye strain.
.PP
Two operating modes are supported:
.TP
.B Location mode (default)
Geographic coordinates are fetched automatically via
.I geoip.sh
and used to compute sunrise and sunset times.
.TP
.B Manual mode
Fixed
.I sunrise
and
.I sunset
times are read from
.IR ~/.config/wlsunset/config .
.PP
If
.I ~/.config/wlsunset/config
does not exist, built-in defaults apply (see
.BR CONFIGURATION ).
.SH WAYBAR MODULE
The
.B custom/sunset
module (signal 6) reflects the current state of
.BR wlsunset (1).
.TP
.B On
Displays a lit bulb icon. Tooltip: "location-based gamma correction".
.TP
.B Off
Displays an unlit bulb icon. Tooltip: "no gamma correction".
.PP
CSS:
.B #custom-sunset
shares a padding group (8 px left and right) with other right-side modules.
No state-specific color rules are defined.
.PP
Click bindings:
.TP
.B Left click
Runs
.BR "sunset.sh toggle" .
.TP
.B exec-if
Runs
.B "sunset.sh check"
to hide the module entirely when
.B wlsunset
is not installed.
.SH SCRIPTS
.SS sunset.sh
The main control script. Accepts the following subcommands:
.TP
.B toggle
If
.B wlsunset
is running, stops it. If not running, calls
.IR start() .
Signals waybar (signal 6) in both cases.
.TP
.B on
Unconditionally calls
.IR start() ,
then signals waybar.
.TP
.B off
Kills
.B wlsunset
.RB ( "pkill -x wlsunset" ),
then signals waybar.
.TP
.B check
Exits 0 if
.B wlsunset
is in PATH, non-zero otherwise. Used by the waybar
.B exec-if
field.
.TP
.I "(no argument)"
Reports the current state as JSON for waybar:
.BR "pkill -x -0 wlsunset"
determines whether the process is running, then outputs
.BR "{\(dqalt\(dq:\(dqon|off\(dq,\(dqtooltip\(dq:\(dq...\(dq}" .
.PP
The
.B start()
function runs as follows:
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Sources
.I ~/.config/wlsunset/config
if it exists.
.IP \n+[step].
Applies defaults for any unset variables:
.BR "temp_low=4000" ,
.BR "temp_high=6500" ,
.BR "duration=900" ,
.BR "sunrise=07:00" ,
.BR "sunset=19:00" ,
.BR "location=on" .
.IP \n+[step].
If
.BR "location=on" :
calls
.I geoip.sh
to resolve coordinates. Falls back to hardcoded values
.RB ( latitude=50.1 ,
.BR longitude=8.7 )
if the geoip response is empty.
.IP \n+[step].
Launches
.BR wlsunset (1)
in the background:
.RS
.TP
.I Location mode
.EX
wlsunset -l LAT -L LON -t TEMP_LOW -T TEMP_HIGH -d DURATION
.EE
.TP
.I Manual mode
.EX
wlsunset -t TEMP_LOW -T TEMP_HIGH -d DURATION -S SUNRISE -s SUNSET
.EE
.RE
.SS geoip.sh
Fetches geographic coordinates from a remote geoip endpoint and caches the result
to
.IR ~/.cache/geoip .
The cache is reused if it was written less than 6 hours ago
.I and
after midnight today; otherwise a fresh
.BR curl (1)
request is made.
.PP
.I sunset.sh
reads
.I latitude
and
.I longitude
from the cached JSON via
.BR jq (1).
.SH CONFIGURATION
.I ~/.config/wlsunset/config
is an optional shell-syntax file sourced by
.IR sunset.sh .
If absent, the built-in defaults below are used.
.TP
.B temp_low
Minimum color temperature in Kelvin, applied at night. Default:
.BR 4000 .
.TP
.B temp_high
Maximum color temperature in Kelvin, applied during the day. Default:
.BR 6500 .
.TP
.B duration
Transition duration in seconds between warm and cool. Default:
.BR 900 .
.TP
.B sunrise
Sunrise time in
.B HH:MM
format. Used in manual mode only. Default:
.BR 07:00 .
.TP
.B sunset
Sunset time in
.B HH:MM
format. Used in manual mode only. Default:
.BR 19:00 .
.TP
.B location
Set to
.B on
to use geoip-based coordinates (default), or
.B off
to use the fixed
.I sunrise
and
.I sunset
times above.
.SH NOTES
.I ~/.cache/geoip
is a runtime cache file and should not be tracked in git.
.PP
.I ~/.config/wlsunset/config
does not currently exist; the module runs entirely on built-in defaults.
Create this file to override any of the values listed under
.BR CONFIGURATION .
.PP
The
.B exec-if
field in the waybar module hides the indicator entirely when
.B wlsunset
is not installed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Defines the
.B custom/sunset
module: signal 6, format icons, tooltips, exec-if, and on-click binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/style.css
CSS for
.BR #custom-sunset :
shared padding group with other right-side modules.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/sunset.sh
Main control script: start, stop, toggle, check, and status for
.BR wlsunset (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/geoip.sh
Fetches and caches geographic coordinates used for automatic sunrise/sunset calculation.
.TP
.I ~/.config/wlsunset/config
Optional user configuration. Sourced by
.I sunset.sh
at startup if present; not currently tracked in git.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/geoip
Cached geoip JSON response. Runtime file \(em not tracked in git.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR wlsunset (1),
.BR pkill (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR curl (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wlsunset (1),
.BR jq (1)
