.TH IDLE-INHIBITOR 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
idle-inhibitor \- waybar idle inhibitor toggle and custom timeout dialog for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
Two complementary controls manage system idle behavior from the waybar indicator:
.TP
.B Left click
Toggles the idle inhibitor on or off. This is built-in waybar behavior \(em no
script is involved. When
.BR active ,
waybar suppresses swayidle directly via the Wayland idle-inhibit protocol;
the system will not lock or sleep regardless of inactivity. When
.BR inactive ,
the timeout configured in
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
applies.
.TP
.B Right click
Opens a rofi input dialog to set a custom idle timeout in minutes. Runs
.IR idle-timeout.sh ,
which regenerates
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
and restarts swayidle to apply the change immediately.
.SH WAYBAR MODULE
The
.B idle_inhibitor
module is a native waybar module (not a custom script).
.TP
.B Deactivated
Displays a sleep icon. No special CSS class; color is inherited from the bar theme.
.TP
.B Activated
Displays an awake icon. CSS class
.BR .activated ;
colored with
.B @theme_selected_bg_color
from the active waybar theme.
.PP
Tooltips:
.RS
.TP
.I Activated
"Idle inhibitor active \- system will not go idle"
.TP
.I Deactivated
"Idle inhibitor inactive \- system will go idle after timeout"
.RE
.SH SCRIPT
.B idle-timeout.sh
opens a compact rofi dmenu dialog pre-filled with
.B 5
and prompts for the desired timeout in minutes.
The dialog uses
.B \-theme\-str
inline overrides on top of the base rofi theme to collapse the list to zero lines,
making it a pure text-input prompt (window 400 px wide, no suggestion list).
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
rofi dmenu opens; the user types a number of minutes and presses
.BR Return ,
or presses
.B Escape
to cancel.
.IP \n+[step].
If the input is empty (Escape or blank), the script exits silently.
.IP \n+[step].
The input is validated as a positive integer. If invalid,
.BR notify-send (1)
fires "Invalid input" and the script exits.
.IP \n+[step].
Minutes are converted to seconds.
.IP \n+[step].
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
is fully regenerated with:
.RS
.TP
.B timeout N
Lock screen after
.I N
seconds (skipped if swaylock is already running).
.TP
.B timeout 2\(muN
Turn displays off after twice the lock timeout; restore on resume.
.TP
.B before-sleep
Lock before system suspend (skipped if already locked).
.TP
.B lock
Deduplication handler: skips if swaylock is already running.
.TP
.B after-resume
Restore display power and run
.IR resume-handler.sh .
.RE
.IP \n+[step].
swayidle is restarted:
.B pkill swayidle
followed by
.BR "swayidle -w -S seat0 &" .
.IP \n+[step].
.BR notify-send (1)
fires: "System will lock after
.I N
minutes of inactivity".
.SH ROFI DIALOG STYLING
The dialog inherits from the base rofi theme at
.IR ~/.config/rofi/config.rasi :
font
.BR "JetBrainsMono NF 12" ,
window with 2 px accent border and 8 px radius, colors from
.I ~/.config/rofi/cachyos.rasi
(auto-generated by
.B theme-rofi.sh
on each theme switch \(em runtime, not tracked in git; see
.BR palette-theming (1)).
.PP
The
.B \-theme\-str
overrides in
.I idle-timeout.sh
narrow the window to 400 px and set
.B listview
lines to 0, producing a pure input dialog with no suggestion list.
.SH NOTES
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
is generated by
.I idle-timeout.sh
every time a new timeout is set.
Do not edit it manually and do not track it in git \(em it will be overwritten.
.PP
The idle inhibitor toggle operates at the Wayland compositor level: when active,
waybar holds an idle-inhibit object that prevents swayidle from receiving idle
notifications. swayidle itself is not stopped or restarted by the toggle.
.PP
For the full swayidle and swaylock ecosystem see
.BR lock-screen (1).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Defines the
.B idle_inhibitor
module: format icons, tooltips, and the right-click binding to
.IR idle-timeout.sh .
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/style.css
CSS for
.B #idle_inhibitor
(padding) and
.B #idle_inhibitor.activated
(accent color).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/idle-timeout.sh
rofi timeout dialog; regenerates swayidle config and restarts the daemon.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rofi/config.rasi
Base rofi theme applied to the timeout dialog.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rofi/cachyos.rasi
Palette color variables for rofi. Auto-generated by
.BR theme-rofi.sh ;
runtime \(em not tracked in git.
See
.BR palette-theming (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
Generated swayidle configuration. Written by
.I idle-timeout.sh
on each timeout change; runtime \(em not tracked in git.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR rofi (1),
.BR swayidle (1),
.BR pkill (1),
.BR notify-send (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swayidle (1),
.BR lock-screen (1),
.BR palette-theming (1)
