.TH LID-HANDLING 1 "2026-03-01" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lid-handling \- lid open/close event handling for sway on a Dell laptop
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Lid Handling functionality intercepts physical lid close and open events
via sway's
.B bindswitch
mechanism. It delegates event processing to two handler scripts, with a
third script fixing Bluetooth zombie connections after resume.
.PP
Requires
.B HandleLidSwitch=ignore
in
.IR /etc/systemd/logind.conf ,
which prevents systemd from acting on lid events directly and hands full
control to sway.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/lid-handler.sh
Lid close handler. Checks whether a lid-close event woke the system from
S3 suspend (ACPI interrupt) and immediately re-suspends if so. Otherwise,
saves keyboard backlight brightness to
.IR /tmp/kbd-lid-brightness ,
sets keyboard backlight to 0, and turns off all displays with
.BR swaymsg (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/lid-open-handler.sh
Lid open handler. Turns displays back on, restores keyboard backlight from
.I /tmp/kbd-lid-brightness
(falls back to 2 if state file is missing), then calls
.I lid-bluetooth-reconnect.sh
to fix any Bluetooth zombie connections.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/lid-bluetooth-reconnect.sh
Waits 3 seconds for system stabilization after resume. Checks whether the
paired Bluetooth device reports "Connected: yes" in
.BR bluetoothctl (1)
but has no active audio sink in
.BR pactl (1).
If a zombie connection is detected, disconnects and reconnects the device.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/75-lid-switch.conf
Sway configuration file that maps
.B bindswitch lid:on
to
.I lid-handler.sh
and
.B bindswitch lid:off
to
.IR lid-open-handler.sh .
Both bindings use
.B --locked
so they fire even when the screen is locked.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/logind.conf
System file (not tracked in dotfiles). Must contain
.B HandleLidSwitch=ignore
to prevent systemd from intercepting lid events before sway can handle them.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR brightnessctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR bluetoothctl (1),
.BR pactl (1)
.SH FLOW
.SS Lid close
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Sway fires
.B bindswitch lid:on
\[->]
.I lid-handler.sh
.IP \n+[step].
Queries
.BR journalctl (1)
for the last "System returned from sleep operation" timestamp
.IP \n+[step].
If within 5 seconds: ACPI wake-from-S3 detected \[->] calls
.B "systemctl suspend"
immediately and exits
.IP \n+[step].
If a suspend is already in progress: exits silently
.IP \n+[step].
Normal lid close: saves
.B dell::kbd_backlight
value to
.IR /tmp/kbd-lid-brightness ,
sets backlight to 0, calls
.B "swaymsg output * power off"
.SS Lid open
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Sway fires
.B bindswitch lid:off
\[->]
.I lid-open-handler.sh
.IP \n+[step].
Calls
.B "swaymsg output * power on"
.IP \n+[step].
Reads saved backlight value from
.IR /tmp/kbd-lid-brightness ;
restores it (or defaults to 2 if missing); deletes state file
.IP \n+[step].
Calls
.I lid-bluetooth-reconnect.sh
.IP \n+[step].
.I lid-bluetooth-reconnect.sh
sleeps 3 seconds, checks for zombie BT connection, forces reconnect if needed
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B Dell keyboard backlight specificity
The keyboard backlight device is identified as
.B dell::kbd_backlight
via
.BR brightnessctl (1).
This is Dell-specific; the save/restore logic in
.I lid-handler.sh
and
.I lid-open-handler.sh
targets this device explicitly.
.TP
.B HandleLidSwitch=ignore requirement
Without this setting in
.IR /etc/systemd/logind.conf ,
systemd-logind intercepts lid events and suspends or locks the system
independently of sway. This would conflict with the custom handler scripts.
.TP
.B Zombie Bluetooth explanation
After resume from suspend, the Bluetooth stack sometimes reports a device
as connected (
.B Connected: yes
in
.BR bluetoothctl (1))
while the audio sink is gone from PulseAudio/PipeWire. The device is
connected at the HCI level but non-functional. The fix is to force a
disconnect/reconnect cycle to re-establish the audio profile.
.SH LOGS
.TP
.I ~/.cache/lid-handler.log
Logged by
.I lid-handler.sh
when it detects and handles an S3-interrupt re-suspend event.
.TP
.I ~/.local/log/bluetooth-reconnect.log
Logged by
.I lid-bluetooth-reconnect.sh
each time a zombie BT connection is detected and a reconnect is forced.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR brightnessctl (1),
.BR bluetoothctl (1),
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR journalctl (1)
