.TH LOCK-SCREEN 1 "2026-03-01" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lock-screen \- lock screen, idle timeout, and suspend coordination for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Lock Screen & Idle functionality manages screen locking via
.BR swaylock (1),
idle timeout via
.BR swayidle (1),
and coordinated suspend locking via
.BR secure-suspend.sh .
.PP
It consists of four core scripts:
.TP
.B lock.sh
Captures a screenshot with
.BR grim (1),
blurs it with ImageMagick, then launches
.BR swaylock (1).
Uses a lockfile to prevent concurrent executions. On exit, resets the
.BR swayidle (1)
idle timer to prevent immediate re-lock after unlock.
.TP
.B auto-idle-timeout.sh
Non-interactive startup script. Generates
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
with a 5-minute default timeout, then starts the swayidle daemon.
.TP
.B idle-timeout.sh
Interactive script. Presents a
.BR rofi (1)
dialog to enter a custom idle timeout in minutes. Validates input,
regenerates
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
with the new value, and restarts the swayidle daemon.
.TP
.B secure-suspend.sh
Locks the screen first (so the screenshot is captured while the monitor
is still on), waits for
.BR swaylock (1)
to start, then calls
.BR "systemctl suspend" .
Prevents a blank screenshot when suspending via the shutdown menu.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B $mod+x
Lock screen immediately (calls
.IR lock.sh ).
.TP
.B $mod+Shift+e, then l
Lock via the shutdown mode menu.
.TP
.B $mod+Shift+e, then u
Secure suspend via the shutdown mode menu (calls
.IR secure-suspend.sh ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/lock.sh
Main lock script: screenshot, blur, swaylock.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/idle-timeout.sh
Interactive idle timeout dialog.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/auto-idle-timeout.sh
Non-interactive startup init for swayidle.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/secure-suspend.sh
Lock-then-suspend coordination script.
.TP
.I ~/.config/swaylock/config
swaylock visual configuration (indicator radius, ring colors, font).
.TP
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
Generated swayidle configuration. Do not edit manually — overwritten by
.I auto-idle-timeout.sh
and
.IR idle-timeout.sh .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/autostart
Contains
.I $initialize_idle_daemon
which enables the swayidle systemd user service on startup.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf
Defines
.I $locking
as the path to
.IR lock.sh .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/default
Binds
.B $mod+x
to
.IR $locking .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/shutdown
Binds
.B l
to lock and
.B u
to secure-suspend within the shutdown mode.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Contains the
.B idle_inhibitor
module which can temporarily disable idle timeout from the bar.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR swaylock (1),
.BR swayidle (1),
.BR grim (1),
.BR convert / magick
(ImageMagick),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR rofi (1)
.SH DAEMON
.BR swayidle (1)
runs as a systemd user service. Its configuration lives at
.IR ~/.config/swayidle/config ,
which is generated and managed by
.I auto-idle-timeout.sh
and
.IR idle-timeout.sh .
The config defines:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Lock after idle timeout
.IP \(bu 2
Turn off displays after 2\[tmu] the idle timeout
.IP \(bu 2
Lock before sleep (
.BR before-sleep
event)
.IP \(bu 2
Lock on explicit lock signal (
.BR lock
event)
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION
The swayidle timeout is configured by running
.B idle-timeout.sh
(via rofi dialog) or by editing the default in
.I auto-idle-timeout.sh
(variable
.BR timeout_minutes ).
The swaylock appearance is configured in
.IR ~/.config/swaylock/config .
.SH FLOW
.SS Lock execution
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.BR lock.sh :
acquires lockfile, exits if swaylock is already running
.IP \n+[step].
Captures screen with
.BR grim (1)
to
.I /tmp/swaylock-blur.png
.IP \n+[step].
Blurs the image with ImageMagick (
.B magick
or
.BR convert )
.IP \n+[step].
Launches
.BR swaylock (1)
with the blurred image as background
.IP \n+[step].
On unlock exit, kills and restarts swayidle to reset the idle timer
.SS Idle initialization (startup)
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Sway autostart triggers
.I $initialize_idle_daemon
(enables swayidle systemd user service)
.IP \n+[step].
.I auto-idle-timeout.sh
generates
.I ~/.config/swayidle/config
with 5-minute default and starts swayidle
.SS Secure suspend
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.BR secure-suspend.sh :
acquires lockfile, calls
.I lock.sh
in the background
.IP \n+[step].
Polls until
.BR swaylock (1)
is running (screenshot taken, display still on)
.IP \n+[step].
Calls
.B "systemctl suspend"
— screen is already locked before display powers off
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swaylock (1),
.BR swayidle (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
