.TH MAL-LOCAL-TRACKING 1 "2026-06-24" "1.3" "sway dotfiles"
.SH NAME
mal-local-tracking \- auto-file aMule and torrent/HTTP downloads into a media library and scrobble anime/manga to MyAnimeList
.SH DESCRIPTION
A self-driving pipeline that watches the
.BR amule (1)
Incoming directory and, whenever a download completes, files it into
.I $HOME/media
\[em] anime by season, manga and books by series \[em] using an isolated headless
Claude "lobo" for the naming and placement judgment. Files are
.B hardlinked
(not moved) so aMule keeps seeding. Once filed, anime played in
.BR mpv (1)
is scrobbled to MyAnimeList by the
.BR tundra (1)
daemon, and manga is read and scrobbled through a local
.B Suwayomi
server.
.PP
The split is deliberate: the bash organizer does all I/O (scan, classify,
hardlink, cache); the LLM lobo does only the per-series judgment (type, canonical
folder name, season), invoked once per new series and then cached.
.PP
A second source covers downloads from
.BR qbittorrent (1)
and
.BR aria2c (1):
on completion each client runs a hook that drops a job in a watched queue; the
.I mal-organizer-dropzone
helper then walks the (possibly season-pack) unit, skips junk and samples, pairs
subtitles, and hardlinks the episodes into the library \[em] reusing the same lobo,
cache, ledger and lock. The download stays in place so the torrent keeps seeding.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mal-organizer
.RI [ --dry-run ]
.PP
.B mal-organizer-lobo
.RI "< " digest
.PP
.B dl-complete-hook
.I "CLIENT UNIT_PATH NAME UID"
.PP
.B mal-organizer-dropzone
.PP
.B manga-sync
.RI [ series ]
.RI [ --dry-run ]
.RI [ --list ]
.RI [ --find " SERIES" ]
.RI [ --map " SERIES MAL_ID" ]
.PP
The organizers are normally invoked automatically by their
.I .path
units (\fImal-organizer.path\fR for Incoming, \fImal-dropzone.path\fR for the
queue, \fImanga-sync.path\fR for reading progress); run by hand to backfill or test.
.SH USAGE
.TP
.B Automatic
A completed aMule download (Incoming) or a finished torrent/HTTP download (client
hook) triggers the matching watcher; nothing to do.
.TP
.B Manual backfill / test
.nf
mal-organizer --dry-run    # show the aMule plan, touch nothing
mal-organizer              # hardlink for real
mal-organizer-dropzone     # process queued torrent jobs
manga-sync --dry-run       # show what would go to MAL, write nothing
.fi
.TP
.B Anime \[->] MAL
Play the episode in
.BR mpv (1)
(not a browser) and watch past 50%; the tundra daemon scrobbles it.
.TP
.B Manga \[->] MAL
Read in Suwayomi (\fIhttp://127.0.0.1:4567\fR, or the \fBManga\fR launcher entry);
.I manga-sync
scrobbles it. Map each new series to its MAL entry once:
.nf
manga-sync --find redo-of-healer     # list MAL candidates
manga-sync --map redo-of-healer 108197
manga-sync --list                    # series, MAL id, resolved progress
.fi
.B Do not
enable Suwayomi's own MyAnimeList auto-progress for these series \[em] see
.B "VOLUMES VS CHAPTERS"
below.
.SH "VOLUMES VS CHAPTERS"
Suwayomi has no concept of a volume. For a Local-source series it treats
.B each .cbz file as one chapter.
Scanlation batches, however, are packed per
.B volume
(tankobon): a 17-file series is 17 volumes \[em] roughly 73 chapters \[em] not 17
chapters. Left to Suwayomi's own tracker, MAL would record "chapter 15" for a
reader who is really on chapter 64.
.PP
.I manga-sync
resolves this from the archives themselves. The top-level folders inside each
.I .cbz
are named after the real chapter (\fI64.2\fR, or \fIVol.01 Ch.0005.2 [Group]\fR).
It replays Suwayomi's page ordering, finds which chapter the last read page falls
in, and PUTs both
.I num_chapters_read
and
.I num_volumes_read
to MAL. Nothing is guessed; the mapping is parsed. Suwayomi's GraphQL track API
cannot send volumes at all (\fIUpdateTrackInput\fR has no such field), which is
why the series is deliberately left unbound in Suwayomi.
.PP
.I num_volumes_read
counts only
.B completed
volumes, so a reader midway through volume 15 reports 14.
.SH FILES
.SS Scripts
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/mal-organizer
The aMule I/O layer: scans Incoming, classifies by extension, consults the cache
then the lobo, hardlinks into the library, records the ledger and cache.
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/mal-organizer-lobo
The judgment layer: reads a TAB digest on stdin, runs an isolated headless
.BR claude (1)
with a forced JSON schema, prints the move-plan.
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/mal-organizer-dropzone
Torrent/HTTP source: reads queued jobs, guards completeness, walks season packs
(skipping junk/samples), pairs subtitles, hardlinks into the library via the
shared lobo/cache/ledger. The download stays put (seeding preserved). Recognizes
video+subtitle files (episode packs) and, since 2026-07-08, comic archives
(cbz/cbr/zip/rar) and books (epub/pdf/mobi/azw3) as well \[em] the same
extension set as
.IR mal-organizer ,
so a manga/book batch downloaded by torrent is filed instead of silently
dropped as "no media".
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/bin/dl-complete-hook
Called by qBittorrent (AutoRun) and aria2 on completion; publishes a job naming
the finished unit into the queue.
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/bin/aria2-deliver
Adapts aria2's completion args (first-file path) into the dl-complete-hook contract.
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/manga-sync
Manga scrobbler: reads reading progress from Suwayomi's GraphQL API, derives the
real chapter from the
.I .cbz
internals, and writes num_chapters_read / num_volumes_read to MAL. Idempotent \[em]
a run with no new progress writes nothing. Deterministic, no LLM.
.SS "systemd user units"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/mal-organizer.path
inotify watch (\fBPathModified\fR) on the Incoming directory; fires the service.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/mal-organizer.service
oneshot that runs the aMule organizer after a 10 s settle.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/mal-dropzone.path
inotify watch on the job queue; fires the dropzone organizer (event-driven, no daemon).
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/mal-dropzone.service
oneshot that runs
.IR mal-organizer-dropzone .
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/manga-sync.path
inotify watch on Suwayomi's database file, which is quiet at rest \[em] so page
turns, and only page turns, trigger a scrobble. No polling.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/manga-sync.service
oneshot that runs
.I manga-sync
after a 90 s settle (debounces the per-page database writes).
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/tundra.service
the anime scrobbler daemon (watches mpv via MPRIS).
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/suwayomi.service
the local manga server (web UI on 127.0.0.1:4567).
.SS State
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/processed.tsv
ledger of handled files, keyed by inode \[em] makes re-runs idempotent (shared by both sources).
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/series-cache.tsv
per-series decisions (\fItitle|sN\fR \[->] type, folder, season) so repeat
episodes skip the LLM (shared by both sources).
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/queue/
job files dropped by the completion hooks; watched by
.IR mal-dropzone.path .
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/manga-mal-map.tsv
series folder \[->] MAL manga id. Written by \fBmanga-sync --map\fR; an unmapped
series is skipped (never guessed).
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/lobo-schema.json
the JSON schema the lobo output is validated against.
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/organizer.log
per-run log (decisions, links, lobo cost).
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/state/mal-organizer/organizer.lock
flock single-instance guard (shared aMule + dropzone).
.SS Configuration
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/tundra/config.toml
tundra MAL tokens (mode 600). Uses tundra's own bundled MAL client.
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/share/Tachidesk/server.conf
Suwayomi config. Overrides appended at the end (HOCON last-wins): bind
127.0.0.1,
.I localSourcePath
= $HOME/media/manga, tray/kcef/auto-browser off.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/qBittorrent/qBittorrent.conf
\fBSession\\DefaultSavePath\fR = $HOME/torrents, plus TempPath/AppendExtension and
an \fB[AutoRun]\fR program calling dl-complete-hook. Edit ONLY while qBittorrent is
closed (it rewrites the file on exit). Backup: \fI.bak-maltrack\fR.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/aria2/aria2.conf
\fBdir\fR = $HOME/torrents plus
.I on-bt-download-complete
/
.I on-download-complete
pointing at aria2-deliver.
.SS Library
.TP
.I $HOME/media/anime/<series>/<installment>/
anime, filed per installment \[em] a numbered
.I season-NN
for ordinary seasons, or a named lowercase kebab-case folder
.RI ( fifth-stage ,
.IR final-stage )
when the series uses named installments instead of plain numbers (the Initial D
"Stages", a "Final Season").
.TP
.I $HOME/media/manga/<series>/
manga (cbz/zip), read by Suwayomi.
.TP
.I $HOME/media/books/<series>/
epub / pdf novels, read with \fBfoliate\fR(1).
.TP
.I $HOME/torrents/
qBittorrent + aria2 download here (in-progress pieces in
.IR .parts/ ).
Completed units stay for seeding; only hardlinks go to the library.
.SH "DATA PIPELINE"
.SS "aMule source"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
aMule finishes a download and moves the complete file into
.IR $HOME/.aMule/Incoming .
.IP \n+[step].
The
.I mal-organizer.path
unit sees the directory change and starts
.IR mal-organizer.service .
.IP \n+[step].
After a 10 s settle the service runs
.IR mal-organizer .
.IP \n+[step].
The organizer lists new media files (skipping any inode already in the ledger),
classifies each by extension, and looks up the series cache.
.IP \n+[step].
Uncached files become a TAB digest piped to
.IR mal-organizer-lobo ,
which returns one JSON decision per file.
.IP \n+[step].
Each file is hardlinked into
.IR $HOME/media ;
the inode is recorded in the ledger and the series decision in the cache.
.IP \n+[step].
Anime played in mpv (with mpv-mpris) is detected by the tundra daemon over MPRIS
and scrobbled to MAL past 50%. Manga read in Suwayomi syncs to MAL.
.SS "Torrent / HTTP source"
.nr tstep 1 1
.IP \n[tstep]. 3
qBittorrent / aria2 finish a download in
.IR $HOME/torrents .
.IP \n+[tstep].
The client's completion hook runs
.I dl-complete-hook
(aria2 via
.IR aria2-deliver )
which writes a job naming the unit into the queue.
.IP \n+[tstep].
.I mal-dropzone.path
sees the queue change and starts
.IR mal-dropzone.service .
.IP \n+[tstep].
.I mal-organizer-dropzone
guards completeness, walks the unit (skipping junk/samples), pairs subtitles, then
hardlinks episodes into the library through the shared lobo/cache/ledger and
removes the job. The download stays in
.I $HOME/torrents
so seeding continues.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR claude (1),
.BR mpv (1),
.BR tundra (1),
.BR java (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR flock (1),
.BR amule (1),
.BR qbittorrent (1),
.BR aria2c (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B mpv \[en] mpv-mpris
plays anime and publishes the MPRIS metadata (the filename) the scrobbler reads.
.TP
.B tundra
MyAnimeList scrobbler daemon; bundles its own MAL client (PKCE, loopback
redirect).
.TP
.B suwayomi-server-preview-bin \[en] jdk-openjdk
the local manga server (JVM); runs on Java 26.
.TP
.B qbittorrent \[en] aria2
torrent/HTTP clients; configured to download to $HOME/torrents and run the
completion hook.
.TP
.B claude
the headless LLM the lobo invokes for naming and placement.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Hardlink, never move.
aMule and the torrent clients seed from their download dirs; moving a file stops
the seed. Hardlinks need the same filesystem (here, one nvme) \[em] the organizer
falls back to
.B cp
across filesystems.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B The lobo is cost-bounded by the cache, not by flags.
A cold call is ~$0.21\[en]0.33 (the 44k context is the operator's CLAUDE.md and
MCP, which
.I --exclude-dynamic-system-prompt-sections
and
.I "--allowed-tools Read"
do not trim). The series cache makes every later episode of a known series
.B free
\[em] a whole season pack costs one lobo call.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Anti-fork-bomb.
The lobo carries
.I CLAUDE_HEADLESS=1
(the operator's hooks bail),
.I "--allowed-tools Read"
(no Agent tool \[em] it cannot spawn lobos), and single-shot
.I --json-schema
(no agentic loop). It runs from systemd, not a Claude hook, so the in-session
PreToolUse block on
.I "claude -p"
is not in the loop \[em] which is also why the lobo hides its claude call inside
the script.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Torrents keep seeding (job-queue, not move).
The download client is the authoritative "complete" signal: its hook queues the
unit's path and the organizer HARDLINKS the episodes \[em] the files are never
moved out of
.IR $HOME/torrents ,
so qBittorrent/aria2 keep seeding (removing the torrent later does not lose the
library copy, since the hardlink survives). Moving them (the naive approach) would
yank files from under the client and error the torrent.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Season packs: junk and subtitles.
The dropzone skips samples (by name and < 10% of median size), \fI.nfo\fR /
\fI.txt\fR / proof / screens, and pairs subtitles to episodes by the
.I SxxEyy
token, hardlinking them next to the video as \fI<stem>.<lang>.srt\fR so players
auto-load them. Unparseable video goes to \fIanime/_unsorted\fR, never dropped.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Play anime in mpv, not the browser.
tundra reads the MPRIS
.I xesam:title
/
.I xesam:url
(the filename), which only mpv publishes cleanly; a browser publishes the tab
title. mpv-mpris auto-loads from
.I /etc/mpv/scripts/mpris.so
(no mpv.conf edit).
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Scrobble needs real playback.
A seek-jump past 50% does not count (anti-cheat); watch past the halfway point.
The series must be on the MAL list. Multi-stage titles map correctly (Initial D
season 4 \[->] "Fourth Stage") via anitomy plus anime-relations.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Named installments, not just numbers.
The lobo
.I season
field is an integer for ordinary seasons but a lowercase kebab-case STRING for
series with named installments (the Initial D Stages \[->]
.IR fifth-stage / final-stage ;
a "Final Season"). The organizers build
.I season-NN
from an integer and use the string verbatim otherwise, so the library folder
shows the real installment name. The schema
.RI ( lobo-schema.json )
allows season to be integer, string, or null. Scrobbling is unaffected \[em]
tundra maps by filename, not folder.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Suwayomi runs as the user, not its system service.
The shipped
.I suwayomi-server.service
has
.I ProtectHome=true
and runs as a system user \[em] it cannot read the 0700 home. The user unit here
reads
.I $HOME/media/manga
directly. Java 26 runs it (it targets 21; a redundant jre21 was removed).
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Why not Houdoku.
Houdoku needs electron32 \[->] nodejs-lts-iron, which would downgrade the system
Node 26 (used by npm, vercel, typescript, mongodb-compass). Suwayomi (JVM)
sidesteps it. Kavita was also dropped \[em] its scrobbling is the paid Kavita+.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B No self-retrigger.
The aMule organizer hardlinks into
.I $HOME/media
(it never touches Incoming), so its own work does not fire the watcher. A settle
coalesces bursts; flock prevents overlap; the inode ledger makes it idempotent.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
All services run under
.I "systemctl --user"
with lingering enabled, so the pipeline works without an active login (matching
aMule).
.IP \[bu] 2
EPUB is content-routed by the lobo (an image-vs-text count inside the EPUB plus the
title): an image-based manga EPUB goes to the manga library and is read and
scrobbled through Suwayomi like a CBZ; a text-novel EPUB goes to
.I $HOME/media/books
and is read with \fBfoliate\fR(1), with MAL marked by hand.
.IP \[bu] 2
The operator's own registered MAL API client is unused by tundra and Suwayomi
(both bundle theirs); it is reserved for that future epub script.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR amule-vpn (1),
.BR mpv (1),
.BR tundra (1)
