.TH MEETING-NOTES 1 "2026-04-10" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meeting-notes \- Record and transcribe meetings with speaker diarization
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meeting-notes record
.RI [ name ]
.br
.B meeting-notes transcribe
.I file
.RI [ language ]
.br
.B meeting-notes help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meeting-notes
captures meeting audio via PipeWire (system output + microphone), merges both streams into a single WAV file, and transcribes it with speaker diarization using whisperX.
.PP
The transcription identifies individual speakers and produces a labeled transcript:
.RS
.nf
[Speaker 1] Bueno, entonces el deadline es el viernes.
[Speaker 2] No llegamos ni de broma.
.fi
.RE
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B record \fR[\fIname\fR]
Start recording meeting audio. Captures system audio (what you hear) and microphone (what you say) as separate PipeWire streams. On
.BR Ctrl+C ,
merges both into a mono 16kHz WAV file suitable for transcription.
.I name
defaults to "meeting".
.TP
.B transcribe \fIfile\fR [\fIlanguage\fR]
Transcribe an audio file with speaker diarization. Uses whisperX with the
.B large-v3
model and pyannote for speaker identification.
.I language
is an ISO-639-1 code (default: "es").
.TP
.B help
Show usage summary.
.SH EXAMPLES
Record a client meeting:
.RS
.nf
meeting-notes record cliente-acme
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stop recording with Ctrl+C, then transcribe:
.RS
.nf
meeting-notes transcribe ~/recordings/meetings/2026-04-10_1430_cliente-acme.wav
.fi
.RE
.PP
Transcribe in English:
.RS
.nf
meeting-notes transcribe recording.wav en
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/meeting-notes
Main script.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/meeting-notes/venv/
Python virtual environment with whisperX, torch (CUDA), and pyannote-audio.
.TP
.I ~/.config/huggingface/token
HuggingFace API token for pyannote speaker diarization models.
.TP
.I ~/recordings/meetings/
Output directory for recordings. Created automatically on first use.
Files are named
.BR YYYY-MM-DD_HHMM_name.wav .
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B PipeWire
Audio capture via
.BR pw-record (1)
and
.BR pw-dump (1).
.TP
.B ffmpeg
Audio stream merging and format conversion.
.TP
.B whisperX
Speech-to-text with word-level timestamps. Runs on CUDA via
.BR faster-whisper .
.TP
.B pyannote-audio
Speaker diarization. Requires accepted model terms on HuggingFace for
.I pyannote/speaker-diarization-3.1
and
.IR pyannote/segmentation-3.0 .
.SH NOTES
The
.B record
subcommand captures audio at the PipeWire level, so it works with any video conferencing app (Zoom, Google Meet, Jitsi, etc.) without requiring app-specific integration.
.PP
First run of
.B transcribe
downloads the whisper large-v3 model (~3 GB) and pyannote diarization models. Subsequent runs use the cached models.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pw-record (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR ffprobe (1)
