.TH MEMORIES 1 "2026-07-10" "1.0" "antares system"
.SH NAME
memories \- antares-memory: persistent two-tier memory for Claude Code (lobos, hooks, semantic search)
.SH DESCRIPTION
Infrastructure that gives Claude Code sessions persistent memory. It runs
\fIaround\fR the model \[em] hooks, headless lobos, a search daemon \[em] and
never loads a skill into context.
.PP
Memories are flat \fI.md\fR files with frontmatter taxonomy
(\fBfeedback_\fR/\fBreference_\fR/\fBproject_\fR/\fBtool_\fR/\fBuser_\fR) in
two tiers:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBGLOBAL\fR \[em] \fI~/.claude/memory-jarvis/\fR (antares-only override via
\fBANTARES_GLOBAL_MEMORY_DIR\fR; a vanilla install such as selene uses the
$HOME slug instead). Auto-recalled in every session. Also holds
\fIjournal/\fR, the episodic session chronicles.
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBPROJECT\fR \[em] \fI~/.claude/projects/<slugify(cwd)>/memory/\fR, one slug
per cwd; its \fIMEMORY.md\fR index is auto-loaded natively by Claude Code when
the cwd matches.
.PP
Six memory lobos operate the system: \fBcronista\fR and \fBdestilador\fR
(headless capture pipeline), \fBgardener\fR and \fBindex-curator\fR (headless
maintenance), plus \fBmemory-router\fR and \fBmemory-recall\fR (in-session
subagents via the Agent tool). A seventh lobo, \fBskill-keeper\fR, shares the
launcher pattern but belongs to the skills domain, not to this system.
.PP
Canonical source: the PUBLIC repo \fBgithub.com/milojarow/antares-memory\fR
(full docs under \fIdocs/\fR). The live install is NOT a git checkout \[em]
sync is MANUAL (see GOTCHAS). Installed on antares and on selene
(endymion@selene).
.SH USAGE
.TP
.B "guarda esto / save this"
Dispatches the \fBmemory-router\fR subagent: decides scope (global vs project),
dedups semantically, writes, announces where.
.TP
.B "\[u00BF]ya tratamos X? / did we already\[u2026]?"
Dispatches \fBmemory-recall\fR: episodic synthesis across memories + journals.
.TP
.B manual search
.nf
~/.claude/scripts/memory-search.py "query text"
.fi
Hybrid semantic+keyword search across global + current slug (works even with
the daemon down, slower).
.TP
.B reindex
\fI~/.claude/scripts/memory-reindex.sh\fR \[em] full rebuild; also runs on
SessionStart and automatically after memory writes (PostToolUse).
.TP
.B update the system
Edit scripts/prompts live (launchers read them per run), then \fBsync the repo
the same session\fR. On selene: \fIcd ~/antares-memory && git pull &&
\&./install.sh\fR.
.SH FILES
.SS "Hook scripts + prompts (~/.claude/scripts/)"
.TP
.I memory-search-hook.sh
UserPromptSubmit: injects semantically relevant memories into every prompt
\[u2265]30 chars via the daemon socket.
.TP
.I memory-journal-init.sh
SessionStart: creates/loads today's + yesterday's journal.
.TP
.I memory-reindex.sh, memory-reindex-if-touched.sh
Index maintenance (SessionStart / PostToolUse on Write|Edit|MultiEdit).
.TP
.I memory-scope-guard.sh
PreToolUse on Write|Edit: writing a PROJECT-scoped memory injects the
per-FACT scope reminder (added 2026-07-10).
.TP
.I memory-chronicle-launch.sh
PreCompact + SessionEnd: watermark/delta plumbing, then chains cronista \[->]
destilador (fire-and-forget, per-session lock).
.TP
.I memory-gardener-launch.sh, memory-curator-launch.sh
SessionEnd: launch gardener (\[u2265]24h cadence) and index-curator
(\[u2265]7d) when due.
.TP
.I memory-*-prompt.txt
The lobos' policies: \fImemory-cronista-prompt.txt\fR,
\fImemory-distiller-prompt.txt\fR (holds the per-FACT scope rule),
\fImemory-gardener-prompt.txt\fR, \fImemory-curator-prompt.txt\fR.
.TP
.I memory-index.py, memory-search.py, memory-search-daemon.py
Indexer, CLI search, UNIX-socket daemon (model warm in RAM).
.TP
.I lib/common.sh
Shared env + path resolution: \fBANTARES_STATE\fR,
\fBANTARES_PROJECTS_DIR\fR, \fBANTARES_GLOBAL_MEMORY_DIR\fR,
\fBantares_home_memory_dir\fR, slugify.
.SS "Lobos (~/.claude/agents-sdk/)"
.TP
.I cronista.mjs, destiller.mjs, gardener.mjs, index-curator.mjs
Headless Agent SDK processes (\fBCLAUDE_HEADLESS=1\fR, isolated from user
settings/hooks). \fIskill-keeper.mjs\fR lives here too but is the skills
domain.
.SS "Subagents (~/.claude/agents/)"
.TP
.I memory-router.md, memory-recall.md
In-session subagent definitions (Agent tool).
.SS "Stores + indexes"
.TP
.I ~/.claude/memory-jarvis/
Global store (antares): memories + \fIMEMORY.md\fR index + \fIjournal/\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.claude/projects/<slug>/memory/
Per-cwd project stores.
.TP
.I .memory-index.db
Per-store SQLite embedding index (one inside each store dir).
.SS "State (~/.local/state/antares-memory/)"
.TP
.I cronista-watermarks/, cronista-deltas/
Per-session transcript progress + extracted deltas (capped ~300KB).
.TP
.I base-backups/
Gardener's tar backups of the whole store before destructive passes (last 5).
.TP
.I gardener-last-run, curator-last-run, *-memory.md, gardener-deletions.txt
Cadence stamps + per-lobo scratch memory + deletion log.
.TP
.I logs/
Per-component logs (chronicle, search, \[u2026]).
.SS "Daemon + wiring"
.TP
.I memory-search-daemon.service
systemd user unit (enabled; antares keeps this LEGACY name \[em] the repo now
ships \fIantares-memory-daemon.service\fR, see GOTCHAS). Socket:
\fI$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/memory-search.sock\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.claude/scripts/.venv/
Python venv with sentence-transformers (legacy location on antares; repo
installs under \fB$ANTARES_STATE\fR).
.TP
.I ~/.claude/settings.json
The 6 hook events: SessionStart, UserPromptSubmit, PreCompact, SessionEnd,
PostToolUse, PreToolUse.
.SH FLOW
.SS "Capture (session close / compaction)"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
PreCompact or SessionEnd fires \fImemory-chronicle-launch.sh\fR (never blocks
the close; any error \[->] exit 0).
.IP \n+[step].
Launcher computes the transcript DELTA since the per-session watermark,
preprocesses to user/assistant text, caps ~300KB; trivial deltas (<400B) just
advance the watermark.
.IP \n+[step].
\fBcronista\fR appends the delta's chronicle to the session journal (global
store). Watermark advances only if it succeeded.
.IP \n+[step].
\fBdestilador\fR distills durable memories from the SAME delta, deduping
against an inline digest of existing memories; decides scope per FACT
(cross-cutting \[->] global).
.IP \n+[step].
Reindex, delta removed. Gardener/curator launchers run next if their cadence
is due (\[u2265]24h / \[u2265]7d).
.SS "Recall (every prompt)"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
UserPromptSubmit \[->] \fImemory-search-hook.sh\fR \[->] daemon socket
(hybrid 70% cosine + 30% BM25, threshold 0.35, top 5, HOME + current slug).
.IP \n+[step].
Hits injected as \fI<auto-loaded-memory>\fR additionalContext; daemon down
\[->] silently no context.
.SS "Write guard (every Write/Edit)"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
PreToolUse \[->] \fImemory-scope-guard.sh\fR: target inside the global store
\[->] silent; PROJECT-scoped memory path \[->] inject per-FACT scope
reminder naming the global dir.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR jq (1),
.BR node (1),
.BR python3 (1)
(venv),
.BR git (1)
(manual repo sync),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B sentence-transformers (venv)
Embeddings; model \fBparaphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2\fR kept warm by the
daemon.
.TP
.B @anthropic-ai/claude-agent-sdk (0.3.157, ~/.claude/agents-sdk/node_modules)
Runs the headless lobos on the Claude subscription when no
\fBANTHROPIC_API_KEY\fR is exported.
.TP
.B jq
Hook stdin parsing + JSON emission in every bash hook.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBRepo sync is MANUAL since 2026-06-11\fR ("moved out of the keeper's
domain"). Rule: any change to scripts/prompts/lobos \[->] sync
\fBmilojarow/antares-memory\fR the same session (scrub-gate: repo is PUBLIC).
A month of unsynced drift (found 2026-07-10) came from skipping this.
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBScope is decided per FACT, never inherited\fR from the file being
appended/enriched. Enforced at write time by \fImemory-scope-guard.sh\fR and
inside the destilador's policy. The lobos run isolated
(\fBCLAUDE_HEADLESS=1\fR, no user hooks) \[em] their prompt IS their guard;
the hook cannot see them. Direct shell writes (a script using \fIcat >\fR)
bypass the guard too.
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBLegacy naming on antares\fR: unit \fImemory-search-daemon.service\fR +
venv \fI~/.claude/scripts/.venv\fR predate the repo's rename to
\fIantares-memory-daemon.service\fR + venv under the stable share dir.
Since repo commit 98875a2 (2026-07-10) \fIinstall.sh\fR detects the legacy
unit and stops/disables/removes it before installing the new one \[em]
migrating antares is one deliberate \fI./install.sh\fR away (the installer
also holds a single-instance flock and writes settings.json atomically).
Still deliberate, not casual: the deploy step also overwrites antares'
locally-evolved scripts with the repo versions.
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBANTHROPIC_API_KEY in the environment makes every session close bill the
key\fR \[em] the SDK prefers it over the subscription (gardener/curator
default to opus). Keep the key out of ambient env on machines running lobos.
.IP \[bu] 2
Never wire a headless lobo into per-tool-use hooks \[em] a model call per
Write/Edit is slow, costly, and the cascade anti-pattern (headless writes
re-trigger hooks; see the 101-session fork-bomb memory). Deterministic
reflexes in bash, judgment in the session or in event-driven lobos.
.IP \[bu] 2
PreCompact and SessionEnd can near-collide; the per-session lock + watermark
make the pipeline idempotent \[em] do not "fix" double-firing by removing one
of the two triggers (a session that never compacts would lose capture).
.IP \[bu] 2
The destilador dedups against an INLINE digest (filename: description) \[em]
never let it Grep+Read the whole store (that timed out at 300s and inspired
the digest).
.IP \[bu] 2
Editing a \fI*-prompt.txt\fR takes effect on the NEXT lobo run (launchers read
per fire) \[em] no restart. Daemon-side changes DO need
\fIsystemctl --user restart memory-search-daemon\fR.
.IP \[bu] 2
\fImemory-jarvis\fR is an antares-only override; on a vanilla install (selene)
the global store is the $HOME slug
(\fI~/.claude/projects/-home-<user>/memory/\fR). Scripts must resolve it via
\fBantares_home_memory_dir\fR, never hardcode.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Persistence: the daemon unit is enabled (starts on login); hooks live in
settings.json (always active); lobos are event-driven (no timers \[em]
cadence via last-run stamps checked at SessionEnd).
.IP \[bu] 2
Selene parity: \fIssh selene 'cd ~/antares-memory && git pull &&
\&./install.sh'\fR (idempotent; backs up settings.json, merges hooks
non-destructively, never touches memory files).
.IP \[bu] 2
The lobos' full architecture, taxonomy, and tuning knobs:
\fIdocs/\fR in the canonical repo.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cheatsheet (1),
repo \fBgithub.com/milojarow/antares-memory\fR (docs/architecture.md,
docs/lobos-agents-sdk.md, docs/tuning-search.md), memoria global
\fIreference_antares_memory_repo.md\fR.
