.TH NEUTRALIZE-BIRTHDATE 1 "2026-03-22" "system hardening" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
neutralize-birthdate \- nullify the systemd userdb birthDate field for all human users
.SH DESCRIPTION
Preemptive countermeasure against OS-level age verification infrastructure.
.PP
systemd PR #40954 (merged 2026-03-18) added a
.B birthDate
field to userdb JSON records. This field feeds age data to
.BR xdg-desktop-portal (1)
for application-level age gating, mandated by California AB 1043
(effective 2027-01-01) and Brazil Lei 15.211 (effective 2026-03-17).
.PP
This tool creates
.I /etc/userdb/<user>.user
drop-in JSON files with
.B birthDate
set to
.BR null ,
neutralizing the field before it arrives in a systemd update.
The systemd Multiplexer merges these drop-ins with NSS records from
.IR /etc/passwd ,
so only the userName, uid, and birthDate fields are needed.
.SH OPERATION
Three event-driven triggers invoke the same script:
.TP
.B systemd .path unit
Watches
.I /etc/userdb/
(external tools writing birthDate) and
.I /etc/passwd
(new user creation via
.BR useradd (8)).
Uses inotify via
.BR PathModified= ,
not polling.
.TP
.B pacman hook
Fires after
.B systemd
or
.B systemd-libs
package upgrades. Catches the moment birthDate support actually lands.
.TP
.B Manual invocation
.B sudo neutralize-birthdate.sh
can be run at any time. The script is idempotent \(em it skips users
whose drop-in already has birthDate set to null.
.SH IDEMPOTENCY
The script uses a python3 guard: if the existing drop-in already contains
.BR "birthDate: null" ,
it exits without writing, preventing feedback loops from the .path unit
re-triggering on its own writes. The service unit also has
.B StartLimitBurst=5
per 60 seconds as a safety net.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.scripts/neutralize-birthdate.sh
Core script. Iterates /etc/passwd for UIDs 1000\(en65533, creates or
updates drop-in JSON files, creates UID symlinks, and restarts
.BR systemd-userdbd (8)
if changes were made. Logs to journald via
.BR logger (1)
with tag
.BR neutralize-birthdate .
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/neutralize-birthdate.service
Oneshot service that executes the script. No [Install] section \(em
activated only by the .path unit and pacman hook.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/neutralize-birthdate.path
Path watcher. PathModified on /etc/userdb and /etc/passwd.
Enabled at multi-user.target.
.TP
.I /etc/pacman.d/hooks/neutralize-birthdate.hook
Pacman alpm hook. Targets systemd and systemd-libs packages,
PostTransaction.
.TP
.I /etc/userdb/<username>.user
Drop-in JSON records created by the script. Minimal format:
.BR "{ userName, uid, birthDate: null }" .
.TP
.I /etc/userdb/<uid>.user
Symlink to <username>.user for UID-based lookups.
.SH VERIFICATION
.nf
# Check drop-in content
cat /etc/userdb/milo.user

# Query via userdbctl DropIn service
userdbctl --json=pretty --service=io.systemd.DropIn user milo

# Check path unit status
systemctl status neutralize-birthdate.path

# Check journal logs
journalctl -t neutralize-birthdate --no-pager -n 20
.fi
.SH BACKGROUND
Ageless Linux (agelesslinux.org) pioneered the birthDate neutralization
approach via their become-ageless.sh script. This implementation extracts
the technical mechanism, replaces the 24-hour polling timer with
event-driven systemd .path units and pacman hooks, and omits the
os-release rebranding and compliance documentation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR userdbctl (1),
.BR systemd-userdbd.service (8),
.BR nss-systemd (8),
.BR systemd.path (5),
.BR alpm-hooks (5)
