.TH NOTES 1 "2026-07-11" "1.0" "sway dotfiles"
.SH NAME
notes \- desktop sticky-notes eww widget with plain-text storage
.SH DESCRIPTION
An
.BR eww (1)
widget resident on the desktop (wallpaper layer, bottom stacking): a text
input on top, the saved notes below it, newest first. Typing a note and
pressing Enter appends it to a plain text file; the list refreshes
instantly through an
.BR inotifywait (1)
watch \[em] no polling. Each row carries two buttons: copy the note to the
Wayland clipboard, and archive it (notes are never destroyed \[em] deleting
moves the line to an archive file).
.PP
The storage is a human-readable text file, one note per line, safe to edit
by hand; the widget picks up external edits immediately.
.SH USAGE
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Click into the input field (the window takes keyboard focus on demand) and
type the note.
.IP \n+[step].
Press Enter \[em] the note lands in the file with a timestamp and the field
clears.
.IP \n+[step].
Per row: the copy button puts the note text in the clipboard
(a notification confirms); the \[lq]\[mu]\[rq] button archives the note.
.PP
From a shell:
.PP
.nf
    ~/.config/eww/scripts/notes-add.sh "texto de la nota"
.fi
.PP
or feed stdin. Editing
.I notes.txt
by hand also works; the widget refreshes on save.
.SH FILES
.SS Widget
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/widgets/notes.yuck
Window definition (feature: notes, role: window): input, scrollable list,
per-row buttons. Geometry lives here.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/styles/notes.scss
Style (catppuccin, house pattern).
.SS Scripts
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/scripts/notes-subscribe.sh
deflisten source: emits the full list as JSON on start and on every file
change (inotify on the parent directory).
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/scripts/notes-add.sh
Appends one timestamped note. Text arrives on stdin (heredoc from the
widget) or as argv (CLI use). Serialized with
.BR flock (1).
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/scripts/notes-delete.sh
Takes a 1-based line number: appends that line to the archive, then removes
it.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/scripts/notes-copy.sh
Takes a 1-based line number: pipes the note text to
.BR wl-copy (1)
and notifies.
.SS Registration
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/eww.yuck
.RB ( include )
entry for the widget.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/eww.scss
.RB ( @import )
entry for the style.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/eww/scripts/open-windows.sh
.B notes-widget
entry in the WINDOWS array \[em] without it the widget vanishes on every
reboot or eww.service restart.
.SS Data
.TP
.I $HOME/documents/notes/notes.txt
The notes. One per line: \[lq]YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM<TAB>text\[rq]. Hand-editable;
lines without a tab are tolerated (shown with no timestamp).
.TP
.I $HOME/documents/notes/archive.txt
Every deleted note, same format. Nothing is ever destroyed.
.TP
.I $HOME/documents/notes/.lock
flock serialization for add/delete.
.SH "DATA PIPELINE"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Enter in the input fires
.B :onaccept
\[->] the note text travels to
.I notes-add.sh
through a quoted-delimiter heredoc on stdin (see GOTCHAS \[em] never argv).
.IP \n+[step].
.I notes-add.sh
appends \[lq]timestamp<TAB>text\[rq] under flock.
.IP \n+[step].
.BR inotifywait (1)
(watching the
.I directory
) sees the write \[->]
.I notes-subscribe.sh
re-emits the JSON list.
.IP \n+[step].
The
.B deflisten
variable updates \[->] eww re-renders the rows (newest first; each row
carries its original file line number).
.IP \n+[step].
Row buttons invoke copy/delete with that
.I line number
only \[em] note text never rides a shell command line.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR eww (1),
.BR inotifywait (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR wl-copy (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR flock (1),
.BR xdg-user-dir (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B eww
Widget system (cargo install, managed by eww.service).
.TP
.B inotify-tools
Event-driven file watch (no polling).
.TP
.B jq
Builds the JSON the widget consumes (handles all escaping).
.TP
.B wl-clipboard
Clipboard integration.
.TP
.B libnotify
Copy confirmation toast.
.TP
.B xdg-user-dirs
Resolves the documents directory (never hardcoded).
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
eww substitutes the
.B {}
placeholder of \fB:onaccept\fR/\fB:onchange\fR into the command string
.I raw
and runs it with \fBsh \-c\fR (verified in eww source at the installed
commit). A note passed as argv would break on quotes and
.I execute
things like $(...). That is why
.B :onaccept
feeds the text through a quoted-delimiter heredoc
(\fIEOF_EWW_NOTES_7C4A\fR) \[em] immune to quotes, expansions and
backticks. Theoretical limit: a note that IS the sentinel line gets
swallowed.
.IP \[bu] 2
Never wire a note's
.I text
into a button command \[em] row actions pass the file
.I line number
only.
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR inotifywait (1)
watches the parent
.I directory
, not the file:
.B sed \-i
(the delete path) replaces the file by rename, which kills an inode watch.
.IP \[bu] 2
The window needs
.B :focusable \[lq]ondemand\[rq]
\[em] click into the input first, then type. A bottom-layer surface does
take keyboard focus on click (verified); without the property, typing goes
to the focused application instead.
.IP \[bu] 2
The input clears after accept via a double update
(\fBnotes-input=' '\fR then \fB''\fR): eww only redraws the field when the
bound variable actually
.I changes
value.
.IP \[bu] 2
Any file save under
.I ~/.config/eww
makes eww auto-reload and re-open
.I every
window (\[ti]40\[en]70s of churn per save observed). Batch config edits;
never save-per-tweak.
.IP \[bu] 2
Automation note: wtype's virtual-keyboard Return does
.I not
fire GTK's activate (onaccept); kernel-level input
.RB ( ydotool )
and a real keyboard do.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Persistent across reboots via the open-windows.sh entry; position is fixed
in the defwindow geometry.
.IP \[bu] 2
The header shows the live note count; with zero notes the list shows
\[lq]sin notas\[rq].
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR eww (1),
.BR meeting-notes (1),
.BR inotifywait (1),
.BR memories (1)
