.TH PALETTE-THEMING 1 "2026-06-01" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
palette-theming \- live color palette theming system for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Palette Theming system provides coordinated color palette switching across
sway window borders, the foot terminal, waybar, rofi, wofi, the eww widget
toolkit, the wob on-screen volume/brightness bar, and the GTK / Qt / Kvantum /
icon / cursor stacks. All apply in a single keystroke (\fB$mod+t\fR) with no
sway reload and no waybar restart.
.PP
The system consists of ten scripts and twenty-three palette theme definitions
under \fI~/.config/sway/themes/\fR (twelve light + eleven dark). Each theme
carries two files: a sway \fItheme.conf\fR (color variables and \fBclient.*\fR
window decoration rules) and a \fIfoot-theme.ini\fR (16-color terminal palette).
.PP
On every theme switch, the orchestrator \fBtheme-selector.sh\fR runs a 3-phase
\fIapply_theme\fR:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBFASE 0 (atomic, ~5 ms)\fR \(em swap symlinks for the pre-generated per-app
outputs from \fI~/.cache/sway-theming/<theme>/\fR; sync \fIqt6ct.conf\fR
(icon_theme + color_scheme_path), \fIKvantum/kvantum.kvconfig\fR (theme=), and
the \fIgtk-{3,4}.0/settings.ini\fR \fBgtk-application-prefer-dark-theme\fR flag.
.IP \[bu]
\fBFASE 1 (parallel, ~50\[en]100 ms)\fR \(em foot OSC live recolor + \fBeww
reload\fR + signals to waybar (SIGUSR2 + RTMIN+17) and mako (SIGHUP).
.IP \[bu]
\fBFASE 2 (background, non-blocking)\fR \(em \fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR
replicates what \fI90-enable-theme.conf\fR used to do under
\fBswaymsg reload\fR: \fBgsettings\fR, \fBenable-gtk-theme.sh\fR, sway
\fBclient.*\fR borders via IPC, \fBwob.sh --refresh\fR; plus
\fBpapirus-folders\fR runs concurrently.
.PP
Total wall-clock for a theme switch: \fB~200\[en]300 ms\fR with zero waybar
flicker. The pre-refactor pipeline took 950 ms\[en]2 s and dropped the waybar
layer-shell for ~3 s on every switch (see \fBGOTCHAS\fR).
.PP
A secondary script \fBtheme-toggle.sh\fR provides automatic light/dark
switching based on local sunrise and sunset times obtained from \fBgeoip.sh\fR.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B $mod+t
Open the theme picker (wofi dmenu). Calls \fItheme-selector.sh\ menu\fR.
.TP
.B Waybar custom/theme (left-click)
Manually toggle light \[<>] dark palette. Calls \fItheme-toggle.sh\ toggle\fR.
.TP
.B Waybar custom/theme (right-click)
Enable or disable automatic solar-time switching. Calls
\fItheme-toggle.sh\ auto-toggle\fR.
.SH FILES
.SS Core scripts
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-selector.sh
Main orchestrator. Implements \fBmenu\fR (wofi picker + apply) and \fBstatus\fR
(waybar JSON icon) modes. The \fBapply_theme\fR function is the 3-phase
pipeline summarized in \fBDESCRIPTION\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-cache-regen.sh
Pre-generates the per-theme outputs in \fI~/.cache/sway-theming/<theme>/\fR so
\fBapply_theme\fR FASE 0 only swaps symlinks (atomic, ~5 ms) instead of
regenerating CSS/SCSS each switch (~150 ms). Run as \fItheme-cache-regen.sh
<theme>\fR or \fItheme-cache-regen.sh all\fR (warms the whole cache, ~1 s for
23 themes). Also emits the accent-derived colors documented in
\fBACCENT-DERIVED COLORS\fR. Invoked lazily by \fBapply_theme\fR if the cache
for the target theme is missing.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-apply-runtime.sh
Replicates what \fI90-enable-theme.conf\fR used to do via \fBexec_always\fR on
\fBswaymsg reload\fR, but invokes everything directly via IPC and gsettings to
avoid the reload (which destroys the waybar layer-shell \(em see
\fBGOTCHAS\fR). Parses the theme.conf for the active theme, then calls
\fBenable-gtk-theme.sh\fR, six \fBgsettings set\fR calls (gtk-theme,
icon-theme, cursor-theme, font, color-scheme \[mu]2), \fBfontconfig.sh\fR,
pushes resolved \fBclient.focused / .focused_inactive / .unfocused / .urgent /
\&.placeholder / .background\fR colors via \fIswaymsg\fR, and finally invokes
\fBwob.sh "$accent" "$bg" --refresh\fR so the on-screen bar respawns with the
new palette.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-apply-foot.sh
Parses a foot-theme.ini and writes OSC 10/11/4;N escape sequences to all
writable \fI/dev/pts/*\fR PTY slave devices, applying colors to running
terminals in real time.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-waybar.sh
Reads the active \fItheme.conf\fR symlink, resolves \fB$background-color\fR,
\fB$text-color\fR, and \fB$accent-color\fR (one level of indirection), and
generates \fI~/.config/waybar/theme.css\fR. Kept for compatibility and ad-hoc
regeneration; the live path now uses the symlink to
\fI~/.cache/sway-theming/<theme>/waybar.theme.css\fR generated by
\fBtheme-cache-regen.sh\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-rofi.sh
Reads the active \fItheme.conf\fR, resolves \fB$background-color\fR,
\fB$text-color\fR, \fB$accent-color\fR, \fB$selection-color\fR, and generates
\fI~/.config/rofi/cachyos.rasi\fR. Same compat note as \fItheme-waybar.sh\fR
\(em the live file is now a symlink to the cache.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-wofi.sh
Reads the active \fItheme.conf\fR, resolves \fB$background-color\fR,
\fB$text-color\fR, \fB$accent-color\fR, \fB$selection-color\fR, and generates
\fI~/.config/wofi/style.css\fR. Same compat note.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-eww.sh
Reads the active \fItheme.conf\fR, generates \fI~/.config/eww/styles/theme.scss\fR
defining \fB$theme-bg\fR, \fB$theme-fg\fR, \fB$theme-accent\fR,
\fB$theme-selection\fR, \fB$color2\fR, \fB$color11\fR. Uses \fBeww reload\fR
(not \fBsystemctl restart eww.service\fR) so it doesn't hit the unit's
StartLimit (5/min) on rapid switches and never leaves orphan daemons.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/theme-toggle.sh
Light/dark palette toggle based on solar time. Uses \fBgeoip.sh\fR for
sunrise/sunset. Stashes the inactive variant as \fItheme.dark.conf_\fR /
\fItheme.light.conf_\fR and swaps on request or automatically.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/wob.sh
Wrapper for \fBwob\fR(1) on-screen bar (volume/brightness). Receives
\fB$accent-color\fR and \fB$background-color\fR as args. Two callers feed it:
sway keybindings (via \fI$onscreen_bar\fR defined in \fI01-definitions.conf\fR)
and \fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR with the \fB--refresh\fR flag, which rewrites
\fI~/.config/wob.ini\fR and respawns the wob daemon so the OSD picks up the
new palette without waiting for the next volume key.
.SS Theme data (one trio per theme)
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf
Color variable definitions (\fB$color0\fR\[en]\fB$color15\fR, or catppuccin
named variables), \fB$background-color\fR, \fB$text-color\fR,
\fB$accent-color\fR, \fB$selection-color\fR, \fB$gtk-theme\fR,
\fB$icon-theme\fR, \fB$cursor-theme\fR, \fB$kvantum-theme\fR, \fB$gui-font\fR,
\fB$term-font\fR, and \fB$gtk-color-scheme\fR (the \fBprefer-light\fR /
\fBprefer-dark\fR discriminator) \(em plus sway \fBclient.*\fR window
decoration rules.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/foot-theme.ini
Terminal palette in foot config format. Includes
\fI~/.config/sway/templates/foot.ini\fR for shared non-color settings. Foot
1.27+ requires \fBcursor=\fR inside \fB[colors-dark]\fR / \fB[colors-light]\fR
\(em the legacy \fB[cursor] color=\fR syntax is rejected (see \fBGOTCHAS\fR).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/packages
Plain-text list of AUR/pacman packages required by this theme (GTK theme, icon
theme, cursor theme, Kvantum theme, fonts). Used as documentation; not parsed
by any script.
.PP
.B Available themes (23 total \(em 12 light, 11 dark):
adwaita-light, catppuccin-frappe, catppuccin-latte, catppuccin-latte-mauve,
catppuccin-latte-peach, catppuccin-latte-rosewater, catppuccin-latte-teal,
catppuccin-macchiato, catppuccin-mocha, dracula, gruvbox-dark,
high-contrast-light, matcha-blue, matcha-green, matcha-leaf, matcha-light-aliz,
matcha-light-azul, matcha-light-pueril, matcha-light-sea, matcha-red,
nordic-bluish-accent, tokyo-night, tokyo-night-light.
.SS Per-theme cache (pre-generated outputs)
.TP
.I ~/.cache/sway-theming/<theme>/
Per-theme directory created by \fBtheme-cache-regen.sh\fR containing the four
files swapped in via symlink by \fBapply_theme\fR FASE 0. Total: ~92 files for
the 23-theme set.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fIwaybar.theme.css\fR \(em \fB@define-color\fR rules consumed by
\fI~/.config/waybar/style.css\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fIrofi.cachyos.rasi\fR \(em rofi color variables consumed by
\fI~/.config/rofi/config.rasi\fR via \fB@import\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fIwofi.style.css\fR \(em GTK CSS for the theme picker.
.IP \[bu]
\fIeww.theme.scss\fR \(em SCSS variables consumed by eww styles via
\fB@import "./theme"\fR.
.RE
.SS Active theme (runtime \(em do not edit or track in git)
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/definitions.d/theme.conf
Symlink pointing to the selected theme's \fItheme.conf\fR. Recreated by
\fBapply_theme\fR on each switch.
.TP
.I ~/.config/foot/foot-theme.ini
File copy (not a symlink) of the selected theme's \fIfoot-theme.ini\fR. Must
be a copy so that foot can \fBinclude=\fR it without runtime-vs-source
ambiguity. Updated by \fBapply_theme\fR on each switch.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/theme.css
Symlink to \fI~/.cache/sway-theming/<theme>/waybar.theme.css\fR. Swapped by
\fBapply_theme\fR FASE 0.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rofi/cachyos.rasi
Symlink to the cache equivalent.
.TP
.I ~/.config/wofi/style.css
Symlink to the cache equivalent.
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/styles/theme.scss
Symlink to the cache equivalent. eww watches its SCSS via inotify and reloads
automatically.
.TP
.I ~/.config/wob.ini
Written by \fBwob.sh\fR with the current palette colors. Updated by
\fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR via \fBwob.sh --refresh\fR on every theme switch.
.SS Configs mutated by apply_theme (orphan-override syncs)
These files used to live outside the pipeline. They are now part of
\fBapply_theme\fR FASE 0 \(em without the sync, they silently override the
active palette.
.TP
.I ~/.config/qt6ct/qt6ct.conf
\fBicon_theme\fR is set from \fI$icon-theme\fR; \fBcolor_scheme_path\fR is
set to \fI/usr/share/qt6ct/colors/airy.conf\fR (light) or
\fI/usr/share/qt6ct/colors/darker.conf\fR (dark). Affects Qt apps without
\fBQT_STYLE_OVERRIDE=kvantum\fR (see \fBGOTCHAS\fR).
.TP
.I ~/.config/Kvantum/kvantum.kvconfig
\fBtheme=\fR is set to \fI$kvantum-theme\fR via \fBsed\fR (no
\fBkvantummanager\fR call needed \(em the helper just edits this file).
.TP
.I ~/.config/gtk-3.0/settings.ini
.TQ
.I ~/.config/gtk-4.0/settings.ini
\fBgtk-application-prefer-dark-theme\fR is set to \fB0\fR (light theme) or
\fB1\fR (dark). Without this sync, every GTK / Qt-portal app renders dark on a
light theme because this flag overrides \fBgsettings color-scheme\fR.
.SS Templates
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/templates/foot.ini
Shared foot settings (font, scrollback, key bindings, cursor style, bell).
Included by every \fIfoot-theme.ini\fR via \fBinclude=\fR.
.SS Configuration references (files that use but do not belong to this system)
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config
Includes \fI~/.config/sway/definitions.d/theme.conf\fR to inject color
variables into the sway config tree.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/default
Binds \fB$mod+t\fR to \fItheme-selector.sh menu\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf
Defines the \fB$onscreen_bar\fR sway variable as
\fIwob.sh "$accent-color" "$background-color"\fR, so every keybinding that
pipes a value to wob uses the active palette.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/90-enable-theme.conf
The original \fBexec_always\fR block that ran on every \fBswaymsg reload\fR to
apply GTK / icon / cursor / font / color-scheme / Kvantum themes. Still
present and functional, but no longer the live path \(em
\fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR replicates it without requiring a reload.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/style.css
Imports \fItheme.css\fR via \fB@import "theme.css";\fR. Uses
\fB@theme_text_color\fR, \fB@theme_selected_bg_color\fR, and the
accent-derived \fB@theme_accent_complement\fR for empty workspace styling.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Defines the \fBcustom/theme\fR module which calls \fBtheme-toggle.sh\fR for
status, click, and right-click actions.
.SH "ACCENT-DERIVED COLORS"
\fBtheme-cache-regen.sh\fR emits three colors per theme, computed by rotating
the accent hue in HSL space (saturation and lightness preserved). GTK CSS has
no \fBhsl(from var() h s l)\fR or \fBcolor-mix\fR with hue rotation, so the
math runs at cache-gen time and the results are emitted as static
\fB@define-color\fR values in each \fIwaybar.theme.css\fR cache file.
.TP
.B @theme_accent_complement
Accent rotated 180\[de] \(em maximum contrast. Used by \fIstyle.css\fR for the
empty-workspace number color so it stands out against any waybar background.
.TP
.B @theme_accent_triad_a
Accent rotated 120\[de] \(em harmonic triad leg A. Available for future use.
.TP
.B @theme_accent_triad_b
Accent rotated 240\[de] \(em harmonic triad leg B. Available for future use.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR wofi (1),
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR pkill (1),
.BR awk (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR sed (1),
.BR python3 (1),
.BR foot (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR gsettings (1),
.BR papirus-folders (1),
.BR wob (1),
.BR eww (1)
.SH FLOW
.SS Theme switch ($mod+t)
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
User presses \fB$mod+t\fR \[->] \fItheme-selector.sh menu\fR launches wofi
listing all directories under \fI~/.config/sway/themes/\fR.
.IP \n+[step].
User selects a theme \[->] \fBapply_theme\fR is called with the theme name.
.IP \n+[step].
\fBLazy cache check\fR: if \fI~/.cache/sway-theming/<theme>/\fR does not
exist, run \fItheme-cache-regen.sh <theme>\fR (first-use cost is one-shot,
~50 ms).
.IP \n+[step].
\fBFASE 0 \(em atomic (~5 ms):\fR symlink \fItheme.conf\fR, copy
\fIfoot-theme.ini\fR, swap symlinks for the four cached outputs
(waybar/rofi/wofi/eww). Then sync \fIqt6ct.conf\fR (icon + color_scheme_path),
\fIkvantum.kvconfig\fR (theme=), and \fIgtk-{3,4}.0/settings.ini\fR
(\fBgtk-application-prefer-dark-theme\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
\fBFASE 1 \(em parallel (~50\[en]100 ms):\fR \fItheme-apply-foot.sh\fR writes
OSC payloads to \fI/dev/pts/*\fR (running terminals recolor instantly) AND
\fBeww reload\fR re-reads the new SCSS symlink, run in parallel. Synchronous
signals fire: \fBpkill -SIGUSR2 waybar\fR (CSS reload),
\fBpkill -RTMIN+17 waybar\fR (theme icon), \fBpkill -SIGHUP mako\fR.
.IP \n+[step].
\fBFASE 2 \(em background (non-blocking):\fR \fItheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR
runs in the background; it calls \fBenable-gtk-theme.sh\fR, six
\fBgsettings\fR calls, \fBfontconfig.sh\fR, pushes \fBclient.*\fR borders via
\fIswaymsg\fR (no reload \(em see \fBGOTCHAS\fR), and invokes
\fBwob.sh ... --refresh\fR to respawn wob with the new palette. Concurrently,
\fBpapirus-folders\fR runs with a per-theme color mapping (catppuccin themes
get \fIcat-<flavor>-<accent>\fR; others use a case-statement fallback).
.IP \n+[step].
\fBapply_theme\fR returns. Total wall-clock: \fB~200\[en]300 ms\fR; background
tasks finish within ~1 s without blocking the user.
.SS New terminal window (any time)
Foot reads \fI~/.config/foot/foot.ini\fR \[->] includes \fIfoot-theme.ini\fR
\[->] loads \fB[colors-dark]\fR \[->] opens with the palette active at the
last theme switch.
.SS Wob on-screen bar (volume/brightness)
Two paths feed wob colors:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBLive (volume/brightness key)\fR: sway keybinding invokes
\fI$onscreen_bar <value>\fR \(em expands to
\fIwob.sh "$accent-color" "$background-color" <value>\fR. \fBwob.sh\fR
writes \fI~/.config/wob.ini\fR if missing, pipes the value to the wob daemon.
.IP \[bu]
\fBTheme switch refresh\fR: \fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR (FASE 2) resolves
\fB$accent-color\fR and \fB$background-color\fR directly from the active
\fItheme.conf\fR (two-level variable indirection) and invokes
\fIwob.sh "$accent" "$bg" --refresh\fR. \fBwob.sh\fR rewrites the ini and
respawns the daemon \(em without this, wob keeps the colors from boot until
the next volume key (which would still use stale sway variables anyway).
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGUSR2
Sent to \fBwaybar\fR(1) to trigger a CSS stylesheet reload.
.TP
.B SIGRTMIN+17
Sent to \fBwaybar\fR(1) to refresh the \fBcustom/theme\fR module output (icon
and tooltip).
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Sent to \fBmako\fR(1) to reload its configuration (picks up the new accent
via the GTK theme integration).
.SH "WAYBAR INTEGRATION"
The \fBcustom/theme\fR module in \fI~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc\fR shows a
moon/sun icon and the active theme name. It calls \fItheme-toggle.sh status\fR
periodically; on left-click it calls \fBtoggle\fR; on right-click,
\fBauto-toggle\fR.
.PP
All waybar module colors derive from the CSS variables in
\fI~/.config/waybar/theme.css\fR (imported by \fIstyle.css\fR). Variables in
use:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fB@theme_base_color\fR, \fB@theme_text_color\fR,
\fB@theme_selected_bg_color\fR \(em base palette.
.IP \[bu]
\fB@theme_accent_complement\fR \(em the empty-workspace number color (see
\fBACCENT-DERIVED COLORS\fR).
.IP \[bu]
\fB@theme_accent_triad_a\fR, \fB@theme_accent_triad_b\fR \(em reserved.
.IP \[bu]
\fB@warning_color\fR, \fB@error_color\fR, \fB@success_color\fR \(em semantic.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBDo NOT call \fIswaymsg reload\fB from the theme pipeline.\fR It re-emits
outputs; waybar tries to recreate its layer-shell surface and times out with
\fITimed out waiting for initial .configure\fR. The waybar process stays alive
but the bar is invisible for ~3 s on every switch. The pipeline now uses
\fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR (IPC + scripts) to avoid this entirely. If you
ever do need to recover from a stuck reload-loss, run
\fBsystemctl --user restart waybar.service\fR \(em \fBRestart=on-failure\fR
does NOT help (the process didn't die, only its surface).
.IP \[bu]
\fBeww must be reloaded with \fIeww reload\fB, not \fIsystemctl restart
eww.service\fB.\fR The unit has \fIStartLimitBurst=5\fR /
\fIStartLimitIntervalUSec=1min\fR; rapid theme switches hit the limit and
leave the bar stuck on the old SCSS. \fIeww reload\fR is in-place, no
StartLimit, no orphan daemons.
.IP \[bu]
\fB"hardcoded" gtk-application-prefer-dark-theme was an orphan override.\fR
For months \fIgtk-3.0/4.0/settings.ini\fR carried \fB=1\fR with no script
touching it, overriding \fBgsettings color-scheme=prefer-light\fR. Every
GTK / Qt-portal app rendered dark on a light theme. FASE 0 now syncs both
files. Audit pipelines by what the consumer \fIreads\fR, not just what the
pipeline \fIwrites\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fBQT_STYLE_OVERRIDE=kvantum makes qt6ct\[aq]s color_scheme_path irrelevant
for Kvantum-themed apps.\fR On this machine the env is set, so Kvantum
dictates the palette and the sync to \fIqt6ct.conf\fR only matters for Qt
apps that don\[aq]t use Kvantum. Kvantum sync (\fIkvantum.kvconfig\fR) is the
load-bearing one for Qt apps.
.IP \[bu]
\fBQt apps do NOT hot-reload theme.\fR The instance of pcmanfm-qt already open
keeps its palette until restart. \fIapply_theme\fR ensures new instances open
in the right palette; live ones need relaunch. This is a Qt limitation, not
the pipeline\[aq]s.
.IP \[bu]
\fBwob.ini needs an explicit --refresh on theme switch.\fR Before the
refactor, \fBexec_always $onscreen_bar --refresh\fR fired on every
\fBswaymsg reload\fR. With reload removed, wob would keep its boot-time
colors forever \(em \fBtheme-apply-runtime.sh\fR now resolves
\fB$accent-color\fR / \fB$background-color\fR from the active theme.conf
(two-level indirection) and invokes \fBwob.sh ... --refresh\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fBfoot 1.27+ rejects the legacy \fI[cursor] color=\fB syntax.\fR Catppuccin
themes imported from upstream use it; they were patched to put
\fBcursor=\fR inside \fB[colors-dark]\fR (or \fB[colors-light]\fR). Validate
new theme additions with \fBfoot --check-config\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fBwaybar \fI#workspaces button.empty\fB needs \fItransition: none\fB on the
base rule.\fR Upstream Alexays/Waybar#3865: when another centerbox module
changes width continuously (Claude Code spinner in \fBcustom/window-title\fR),
GTK fires every named transition on every empty button each tick \(em they
pulse. Named transitions for hover MUST live on \fB:hover\fR, not on the base
selector.
.IP \[bu]
\fBGTK CSS supports only \fImin-width\fB; there is no \fImax-width\fR.\fR The
workspaces module width is anchored with \fImin-width: 400px\fR \(em large
enough that the hover pop (font-size + padding) fits without growing the
container.
.IP \[bu]
\fBLazy cache regeneration must wait one round-trip.\fR \fBapply_theme\fR
detects a missing cache dir and runs \fBtheme-cache-regen.sh\fR synchronously
before swapping symlinks. After a fresh theme is added under
\fI~/.config/sway/themes/\fR, the first switch to it includes the ~50 ms cache
build; subsequent switches are instant.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBLight vs dark count.\fR The current set is 12 light + 11 dark, classified
by the \fB$gtk-color-scheme\fR value in each theme.conf. Light themes set
\fBprefer-light\fR; \fIapply_theme\fR uses the same value to derive Qt scheme
+ GTK dark flag.
.IP \[bu]
\fBLive terminal recoloring\fR works because writing to \fI/dev/pts/N\fR
sends data to the terminal master\[aq]s read buffer. Foot processes OSC
sequences as program output and updates its palette without a restart.
.IP \[bu]
\fBFoot does not support \fBSIGHUP\fR config reload\fR (the developer
explicitly rejected it), so the OSC mechanism is the only way to recolor
running instances.
.IP \[bu]
\fBGTK apps\fR pick up theme changes instantly via \fBgsettings\fR
notifications. GTK4/libadwaita apps may require a restart in some cases.
.IP \[bu]
\fBCursor theme\fR changes apply to newly launched apps. Existing windows may
not update until restarted.
.IP \[bu]
\fBMatcha-* and dracula themes\fR share the same Base16 Seti UI base palette.
Their distinction comes from the accent and, for dracula, the Dracula purple
(#bd93f9) in the ANSI blue slot (regular4/bright4).
.IP \[bu]
\fBCatppuccin themes\fR use named palette variables (rosewater, flamingo,
base, surface1, etc.) instead of \fB$color0\fR\[en]\fB$color15\fR. The four
catppuccin flavors share GTK / cursor / Kvantum families and differ only in
palette values. The catppuccin-latte-* variants share the latte palette but
swap the accent color.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR foot (1),
.BR sway (5),
.BR wofi (1),
.BR wob (1),
.BR eww (1),
.BR papirus-folders (1),
.BR gsettings (1)
