.TH PAPER-UPDATE 1 "2026-07-12" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
paper-update \- background updater for Paper Desktop (paper.design)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B paper-update
.PP
No arguments. Every code path prints its outcome (up to date, skip, updated,
error); nothing is silent.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Paper Desktop's built-in electron-updater only downloads updates while the app
is open and installs them on exit, which forced an open-close-open dance to
actually run the newest build. paper-update does the same job out-of-band: a
systemd user timer (06:00 and 18:00, persistent) queries the ToDesktop update
feed, compares the published sha512 against the installed AppImage, and when
they differ downloads, verifies, and atomically swaps the file. Paper is
therefore already current when launched.
.PP
The in-app updater is left untouched as a harmless backstop: at worst it sees a
release published less than ~12 hours ago, downloads it, and installs it on
exit \[em] exactly the old behavior, but rare.
.SH USAGE
Fully automatic. On a successful update a notification appears for 8 seconds
(\[lq]Paper actualizado\[rq]); real failures raise a persistent notification.
.TP
.B paper-update
Run a check manually.
.TP
.B journalctl --user -u paper-update.service
Run history and outcomes.
.TP
.B systemctl --user list-timers 'paper-update*'
Next scheduled run.
.TP
.B PAPER_APPIMAGE=/path/to/copy paper-update
Test the full download/swap path against a scratch copy instead of the real
AppImage.
.SH FILES
.SS Scripts
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/paper-update
The updater. Feed URL is hardcoded from the AppImage's embedded
.IR resources/app-update.yml .
.SS Units
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/paper-update.service
Type=oneshot, idle CPU/IO scheduling.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/paper-update.timer
OnCalendar 06:00 + 18:00, AccuracySec 15min, Persistent=true (missed runs fire
at next login). Enabled.
.SS Application files (pre-existing, not owned by this feature)
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/share/zap/v2/paper
The target AppImage. Legacy zap path \[em] zap itself is uninstalled, but the
path is load-bearing (see GOTCHAS).
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/bin/paper
Symlink to the AppImage; what the .desktop launches.
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/share/applications/paper.desktop
Exec uses the absolute symlink path (the libpaper-conflict fix; see the
paper-desktop-libpaper-conflict memory note).
.SS State
None of its own \[em] the script is stateless by design (see GOTCHAS).
.I $HOME/.cache/@paperdesktop-updater/
belongs to the in-app updater, not to this feature.
.SH FLOW
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Guard: if the AppImage is held open (\fBfuser\fR) or Paper processes exist
(\fBpgrep\fR '[.]mount_paper'), log \[lq]skip: Paper is running\[rq] and exit 0.
.IP \n+[step].
Fetch
.I latest-linux.yml
from https://download.todesktop.com/2601167vjw8xe (curl, 3 retries). Offline
(curl rc 6/7/28) logs a skip and exits 0; other failures notify loudly.
.IP \n+[step].
Parse top-level
.IR version ,
.IR path ,
.I sha512
(awk, anchored to column 0).
.IP \n+[step].
Compute the local AppImage sha512 in base64 (openssl) and compare; equal means
up to date, exit 0.
.IP \n+[step].
Download the new AppImage to a temp file in the same directory.
.IP \n+[step].
Verify the download's sha512 against the feed; mismatch aborts, nothing
installed.
.IP \n+[step].
chmod +x, then atomic
.B mv
over the target.
.IP \n+[step].
Log and notify success (8 s timeout).
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR curl (1),
.BR openssl (1),
.BR fuser (1),
.BR pgrep (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR awk (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
All official-repo, already part of the base install \[em] nothing was added for
this feature.
.TP
.B curl
Feed fetch and AppImage download.
.TP
.B openssl
sha512 digest in base64 (matches the feed's encoding).
.TP
.B psmisc
Provides fuser, the running-app guard.
.TP
.B procps-ng
Provides pgrep, the fallback guard.
.TP
.B libnotify
notify-send for success/failure notifications (reaches mako from user
services on this machine).
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
The feed's sha512 is the \fBbase64\fR of the digest, not hex \[em]
compare with \fIopenssl dgst -sha512 -binary | openssl base64 -A\fR;
.BR sha512sum (1)
output will never match.
.IP \[bu] 2
The yml has per-file sha512 entries (indented) plus top-level ones; the parser
anchors to \fI^sha512:\fR / \fI^path:\fR. Unanchored grep grabs the wrong
value.
.IP \[bu] 2
Offline is a normal laptop state, not an error: curl rc 6/7/28 exits 0 with a
log line and no notification. Only real failures (feed format change, sha
mismatch, broken download) notify.
.IP \[bu] 2
Running-app detection: the AppImage's FUSE mount holds the file open, so
\fBfuser -s\fR on the AppImage is ground truth; \fBpgrep -f '[.]mount_paper'\fR
catches the electron children. A naive \fIpgrep paper\fR would false-positive
(/usr/bin/paper from libpaper exists on this system).
.IP \[bu] 2
Two updaters writing the same file is safe by construction: both atomically
rename the same latest artifact, and a running Paper keeps its old inode. The
skip-while-running guard exists for determinism, not safety.
.IP \[bu] 2
.I ~/.local/share/zap/v2/paper
looks like a stale zap leftover but is \fBload-bearing\fR: the in-app updater
replaces that exact path, and the symlink + .desktop point there. Do not
relocate or \[lq]clean up\[rq] the directory.
.IP \[bu] 2
The temp download lives in the same directory as the target so the final
.B mv
is an atomic rename (cross-filesystem would not be).
.IP \[bu] 2
Stateless on purpose: no version stamp files. Ground truth is
sha512(installed file) vs feed, so the script stays correct even when the
in-app updater replaces the AppImage behind its back.
.IP \[bu] 2
AUR
.I paper-desktop-bin
was evaluated and rejected: abandoned at 0.1.10 while upstream ships 0.4.x.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
A no-op check costs ~2.5 s (sha512 over the 144 MB AppImage dominates); an
update additionally downloads the full AppImage \[em] the feed publishes
blockmaps, but delta download was not worth reimplementing.
.IP \[bu] 2
The feed URL comes from
.I resources/app-update.yml
inside the AppImage (\fIpaper --appimage-extract 'resources/app-update.yml'\fR).
If Paper ever migrates off ToDesktop, re-extract and update the script.
.IP \[bu] 2
If the \[lq]update downloaded\[rq] message still appears at launch some day,
the release is simply newer than the last timer run \[em] ignore it, keep
working; it installs on exit.
.IP \[bu] 2
Script and units are deliberately \fBnot\fR tracked in dotfiles, matching the
convention for ~/.scripts and maintenance timers on this machine.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR systemd.timer (5),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR curl (1),
.BR fuser (1)
