.TH PRICING 1 "2026-07-06" "1.0" "sway dotfiles"
.SH NAME
pricing \- local offline PFAE pricing/quoting cockpit (LTV:CAC + cost-plus + progressive ISR)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pricing
.PP
Takes no arguments and no flags. Opens the calculator cockpit in the default
browser and exits.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pricing
is a single self-contained HTML page that answers one question: \(lqhow much
do I charge this new client?\(rq It is built for a Mexican freelancer/agency
operating as Persona F\('isica con Actividad Empresarial (PFAE), and combines
two pricing heuristics with real progressive income tax:
.IP \(bu 3
.B LTV:CAC
\(em a client's lifetime value must be some multiple of what it cost to
acquire them, or the relationship burns money.
.IP \(bu 3
.B Cost-plus
\(em price is derived bottom-up from a target net take-home salary plus
monthly business costs plus profit, expressed as a real hourly cost.
.PP
The engine turns a desired net salary into the actual pre-tax utilidad
required (inverting Mexico's progressive ISR brackets), adds deductible
business costs, and divides by monthly capacity hours to get a
tax-aware cost per hour. Each quote is then priced in one of three modes:
.B renta
(recurring monthly rent, the primary model), \c
.B unico
(one-off project), or \c
.B buyout
(client buys out of a recurring contract).
.PP
The tool runs entirely offline \(em no network calls, no login, no server.
All state lives in the browser's
.B localStorage
for the
.I file://
origin. It is an internal decision aid only, never client-facing.
.SH FILES
.SS Application
.TP
.I $HOME/projects/pricing-calculator/index.html
One self-contained HTML file: inline
.B <style>,
inline
.B <script>
math engine, inline UI script. Zero external dependencies, zero network
calls. The math engine lives between the
.I // ENGINE_START
and
.I // ENGINE_END
comment markers inside the page and is exposed as
.B globalThis.PE
so it can be exercised by a separate test file outside the DOM.
.SS Launcher
.TP
.I $HOME/.scripts/pricing
Thin wrapper: resolves the
.I index.html
path, hands it to
.BR xdg-open (1)
as a
.I file://
URL in the background, and prints a one-line confirmation. Exits 1 with a
message if the HTML file is missing.
.SS "Local storage (browser state)"
Two keys under the page's
.B localStorage,
scoped to the
.I file://
origin (only this browser profile sees them):
.TP
.I pricing.settings.v1
\(lqMi negocio\(rq \(em the operator's global business settings: target net
monthly salary, itemized monthly fixed costs (each with a
.B deductible
flag), capacity hours per month, a manual USD\(->MXN FX rate, the IVA
regime, the target LTV:CAC ratio, target margin, and target buyout months.
Set once, edited rarely. The ISR bracket table is
.I not
persisted under this key \(em see GOTCHAS.
.TP
.I pricing.quotes.v1
Saved quote history: an array of
.RI { id ", " clientName ", " quote ", " savedAt }
entries written whenever a quote is explicitly saved. A convenience list
only \(em clearing it loses saved drafts, not any engine behavior.
.SH "CALC PIPELINE"
Two ordered stages. Stage 1 runs once per settings change; Stage 2 runs
once per quote and consumes Stage 1's output.
.PP
\fBStage 1 \(em businessFigures(settings)\fR
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Split fixed costs into
.B Cded
(sum where
.I deductible
is true) and
.B Cnonded
(sum where false).
.IP \n+[step].
.B U
(utilidad, taxable profit) =
.I solveUtilidad(salaryNet, Cnonded)
\(em inverts the progressive ISR table to find the utilidad that nets
.I exactly
.I salaryNet
take-home after ISR and non-deductible costs.
.IP \n+[step].
.B isrMonthly
=
.I isr(U)
\(em the monthly ISR bracket tax on U.
.IP \n+[step].
.B nut
= U + Cded \(em total monthly revenue needed to cover profit plus
deductible costs.
.IP \n+[step].
.B costHour
= nut / capacityHours \(em the real, tax-aware hourly cost of running
the business.
.PP
\fBStage 2 \(em quoteOutputs(settings, quote)\fR
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.B buildHours
= buildDays \(mu hoursPerDay;
.B buildCost
= buildHours \(mu costHour \(em this is CAC (customer acquisition cost).
.IP \n+[step].
Convert the quoted price to MXN via
.I fxUsdMxn
if quoted in USD, then apply the IVA regime
.RI ( ivaMode )
to get
.B net
(revenue that is actually the operator's) and
.B ivaToSat
(the portion owed to SAT).
.IP \n+[step].
Branch on
.B mode:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B renta
\(em LTV = (net \- serveCostMonthly) \(mu retentionMonths; ratio = LTV /
CAC; sem\('aforo is green when ratio \(>= targetRatio, yellow
when ratio \(>= 1, red otherwise; breakEvenClients = ceil(nut / net);
plus a suggested price floor/ceiling and an effective-hourly table at
1, 12, 24, and retentionMonths months.
.IP \(bu 2
.B unico
\(em priceFloor = buildCost; priceSuggested = buildCost \(mu
(1 + targetMargin).
.IP \(bu 2
.B buyout
\(em buyoutFair = monthlyRent \(mu targetBuyoutMonths; proposedInMonths
= proposedPrice / monthlyRent; warns when proposedInMonths < 12.
.RE
.SH USAGE
Run
.B pricing
to open the cockpit, fill in \(lqMi negocio\(rq once, then price each new
quote in the quote form. Worked example, renta mode, using the app's
built-in defaults (a placeholder target salary, default capacity hours,
and a lump default fixed-cost total \(em edit all three for your real
numbers in Settings):
.PP
.RS
.nf
Quote:  renta, price $4,000 MXN/mes, build 3 d\('ias \(mu 12 h/d\('ia
        (36 build hours), retenci\('on 24 meses, sin factura
Result: CAC (buildCost)  ~4,239 MXN
        LTV              96,000 MXN   (4,000 \(mu 24)
        LTV:CAC ratio    ~22.6   \(-> sem\('aforo GREEN (target ratio 3)
        break-even       6 clientes  (ceil(nut / net))
.fi
.RE
.PP
Reading it: at this hourly cost structure, a single $4,000/mes taquer\('ia
client returning for 24 months is worth ~22.6\(mu what it cost to build
their system \(em far past the 3\(mu floor \(em and six such clients
alone cover the whole monthly nut (profit target + deductible costs).
Change any input (retention, price, build time, capacity hours) and every
downstream number recomputes live.
.SH GOTCHAS
.TP
.B The ISR table is a pricing estimate, not a filing
The bundled 2026 monthly ISR bracket table was cross-checked against
facturama before shipping. A calculamx lookup during that same check
served
.I stale
2024\(en2025 brackets \(em do not trust calculamx as a source for this
table. Confirm the shipped brackets against the authoritative SAT Anexo 8
(RMF 2026) before relying on this tool for anything beyond a pricing
decision. The table is a plain data array in the source and can be edited
directly for a new fiscal year; it is not yet exposed as a Settings-UI
control.
.TP
.B The IVA regime changes the math materially and is not yet confirmed
.I ivaMode
defaults to
.B noFactura
(no invoice, no IVA netted \(em a tax-risk flag, not a recommendation).
Switching to
.B incluido
nets revenue by dividing by 1.16; \c
.B masIva
assumes the client pays price \(mu 1.16 on top. Which mode is correct
depends on whether prices are quoted IVA-included and whether an invoice
is actually issued \(em decide this per client before trusting
.I net
or any LTV figure derived from it.
.TP
.B Foreign-SaaS deductibility is an open question
Fixed monthly costs default to
.I deductible = true
optimistically. A large share of a typical fixed-cost stack is
foreign SaaS (LLM APIs, TTS, automation platforms) billed without a
Mexican CFDI. If those line items are not actually deductible under
PFAE rules, unchecking
.I deductible
per row raises U (and therefore ISR and nut) \(em the tool will not
decide this for you; it only lets you flip the flag and see the effect.
.TP
.B FX is manual, not live
.I fxUsdMxn
is a fixed number sitting in settings, not fetched from anywhere. A
stale rate silently skews every USD-quoted price. Update it by hand
when the peso moves meaningfully.
.TP
.B Retention is the single most load-bearing estimate in the model
The entire
.B renta
mode's LTV and LTV:CAC ratio depend on
.I retentionMonths,
which is a guess, not a measurement. The effective-hourly table (at 1,
12, 24, and retentionMonths months) exists specifically to expose that
sensitivity \(em read the whole table, don't just trust the sem\('aforo
color at the guessed retention.
.TP
.B isrTable is deliberately stripped from localStorage on every save
.I saveSettings
always writes
.I isrTable: undefined
into
.I pricing.settings.v1;
.I loadSettings
always re-attaches the in-script
.B PE.ISR_2026
constant after reading. This is intentional \(em it means localStorage
can never hold a stale copy of the tax table across a yearly bracket
update; only the source array does. Do not "fix" this by persisting the
table.
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
Nothing here starts on login or boot; the cockpit is a static file opened
on demand by the launcher.
.IP \(bu 2
Quote history is a local browser convenience, not synced or backed up
anywhere \(em treat saved quotes as disposable notes, not records.
.IP \(bu 2
A yearly ISR bracket update means editing the
.B ISR_2026
array in
.I index.html
directly; there is no import/upload path.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cheatsheet (1)
