.TH RECORDING 1 "2026-03-23" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
recording \- screen recording with region selection, audio support, and bar indicator for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Recording functionality covers the full pipeline from region selection to file output:
interactive window-snapping region selection via
.BR slurp (1),
an optional 3-second countdown, recording via
.BR wf-recorder (1),
and a bar indicator (eww or waybar) that appears while a recording is in progress.
.PP
A single script handles both starting and stopping:
.TP
.B recorder.sh
Checks whether
.BR wf-recorder (1)
is already running via
.BR pgrep (1).
If not running, prompts for region selection, counts down, and starts the recorder.
If already running, sends
.B SIGINT
to stop it gracefully.
In both cases it signals both bars (eww via USR1, waybar via signal 8)
to update the recording indicator.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
Enter recording mode by pressing
.BR $mod+Shift+r .
The sway bar displays a pango-markup label showing a video camera icon,
the word
.BR Record ,
the key
.BR (r) ,
and a note that
.B Shift
adds audio (microphone icon).
Inside the mode:
.TP
.B r
Select a region and start recording
.B without
audio. Output is a
.B .webm
file encoded with the VP8 codec (libvpx).
.TP
.B Shift+r
Select a region and start recording
.B with
audio. Output is a
.B .mp4
file.
.TP
.B Escape
Return to default mode without recording.
.PP
To stop an active recording from anywhere:
.TP
.B $mod+Escape
Runs
.I recorder.sh
which detects
.B wf-recorder
is running and sends
.B SIGINT
to stop it gracefully.
.SH SCRIPT BEHAVIOR
.SS Starting a recording
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.I recorder.sh
runs
.B pgrep -x wf-recorder
to confirm no recording is active.
.IP \n+[step].
Output directory is resolved via
.BR "xdg-user-dir VIDEOS" .
A timestamped filename is built in the form
.BR recording_YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS .
.IP \n+[step].
A
.BR notify-send (1)
notification "Select a region to record" appears (expires after 1 s).
.IP \n+[step].
Region selection runs via the pipeline
.PP
.RS
.EX
swaymsg -t get_tree | jq -r '.. | select(.pid? and .visible?) |
    .rect | "\e(.x),\e(.y) \e(.width)x\e(.height)"' | slurp
.EE
.RE
.PP
This offers visible windows as snap targets rather than a free-pixel selection.
.IP \n+[step].
A 3-second countdown fires three
.BR notify-send (1)
notifications ("Recording in 3 seconds", "Recording in 2 seconds",
"Recording in 1 seconds"), one per second.
.IP \n+[step].
After 0.5 s,
.B signal_bars
is called in the background to signal both eww (USR1 to
.IR recorder-subscribe.sh )
and waybar (signal 8) so the bar indicator appears
before the first frame is captured.
.IP \n+[step].
.BR wf-recorder (1)
is launched with the selected geometry:
.RS
.TP
.B Without audio (-r)
.EX
wf-recorder -g "$area" -c libvpx \e
    --codec-param="qmin=0" --codec-param="qmax=25" \e
    --codec-param="crf=4" --codec-param="b:v=1M" \e
    --file="$target_path/$timestamp.webm"
.EE
.TP
.B With audio (Shift+r)
.EX
wf-recorder --audio -g "$area" --file="$target_path/$timestamp.mp4"
.EE
.RE
.IP \n+[step].
When
.BR wf-recorder (1)
exits,
.B signal_bars
is called again to hide the bar indicators, and a
.BR notify-send (1)
notification "Finished recording \fI<path>\fP" is shown.
.SS Stopping a recording
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.BR pkill (1)
sends
.B SIGINT
to the
.B wf-recorder
process:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pkill -x --signal SIGINT wf-recorder
.EE
.RE
.IP \n+[step].
The notification and bar signaling are handled by the first instance of
.I recorder.sh
(the one that started the recording), which continues executing after
.B wf-recorder
exits.
.PP
Stopping can be triggered in three ways: the
.B $mod+Escape
keybinding, clicking the eww or waybar indicator, or by
.I recorder.sh
itself when it detects
.B wf-recorder
is already running.
.SH EWW INDICATOR (DEFAULT)
The eww bar shows a recording indicator in the
.B center zone
(replacing the window title) while a recording is active.
It displays a red pulsating record icon with a
.B REC
label.
.TP
.B Visibility
Controlled by a
.BR deflisten
variable fed by
.IR recorder-subscribe.sh ,
which checks
.BR "pgrep -x wf-recorder" .
The indicator is invisible when no recording is in progress.
.TP
.B Update mechanism
.I recorder.sh
sends
.B USR1
to the
.I recorder-subscribe.sh
process after starting or stopping a recording.
.TP
.B Click
Left-click writes to the named pipe
.I /tmp/eww-recorder
which triggers
.B pkill -x --signal SIGINT wf-recorder
to stop the recording.
.SH WAYBAR INDICATOR (FALLBACK)
The
.B custom/wf-recorder
module in waybar shows a recording icon (nf-md-record_circle) in
.B @error_color
(red) while a recording is active.
.TP
.B Visibility
Controlled by
.B exec-if
which runs
.BR "pgrep wf-recorder" .
The module is invisible when no recording is in progress.
.TP
.B Signal
8 (
.BR SIGRTMIN+8 ).
Both
.I recorder.sh
and the
.B $mod+Escape
binding send this signal after changing the recorder state.
.TP
.B Tooltip
"press $mod+Esc to stop recording"
.TP
.B Click
Left-click runs
.B pkill -SIGINT wf-recorder && waybar-signal recorder
to stop the recording and refresh the indicator.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/recorder.sh
Main script: starts or stops the recording, handles countdown, region selection,
dual-bar signaling (eww + waybar), and notifications.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/recording
Sway mode configuration: defines
.IR $mode_recording ,
.IR $recorder ,
all in-mode keybindings, and the
.B $mod+Shift+r
entry binding and the
.B $mod+Escape
stop binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/scripts/recorder-subscribe.sh
Eww deflisten script: emits JSON recording state, receives USR1 signals
from recorder.sh and stop commands via named pipe
.IR /tmp/eww-recorder .
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/widgets/bar.yuck
Eww bar definition: contains the recording indicator widget in the center zone.
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/styles/recorder.scss
Eww SCSS: red pulsating animation for the recording indicator.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf
Defines the
.I $recorder
variable pointing to
.IR recorder.sh .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf
Defines the
.I $colorN
variables (e.g.\&
.IR $color5 ,
.IR $color10 )
referenced in the pango markup of
.IR $mode_recording .
The active theme is symlinked at runtime to
.I ~/.config/sway/definitions.d/theme.conf
(generated — not tracked in git).
See
.BR palette-theming (1)
for the full theming system.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Defines the
.B custom/wf-recorder
module (signal 8, exec-if, on-click).
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/style.css
CSS for
.BR #custom-wf-recorder :
colors the recording icon with
.IR @error_color .
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR wf-recorder (1),
.BR slurp (1),
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR pgrep (1),
.BR pkill (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR xdg-user-dir (1)
.SH STORAGE
Recordings are saved to
.I ~/Videos/
by default, as resolved by
.BR "xdg-user-dir VIDEOS" .
Override by setting
.B XDG_VIDEOS_DIR
in your environment before starting sway.
.PP
Filenames follow the format:
.RS
.TP
.B recording_YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.webm
Region recording without audio (VP8 codec).
.TP
.B recording_YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.mp4
Region recording with audio.
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wf-recorder (1),
.BR slurp (1),
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR notify-send (1)
