.TH RESIZE 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
resize \- interactive window resize and gap adjustment mode for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
Resize mode allows the focused window to be grown or shrunk incrementally with the
arrow keys, and the inner gap of the current workspace to be adjusted with
.B +
and
.BR - .
.PP
The sway bar displays a pango-markup label while the mode is active, showing a
resize icon, the word
.BR Resize ,
the navigation hint
.BR "(↑ ↓ ← →)" ,
.B "Increase Gaps"
.BR "(+)" ,
and
.B "Decrease Gaps"
.BR "(-)" .
.SH KEYBINDINGS
Enter resize mode by pressing
.BR $mod+r .
Inside the mode:
.SS Window resize \(em fine (10 px per press)
.TP
.BR "← " / " →"
Shrink / grow the focused window's width by 10 px.
.TP
.BR "↑ " / " ↓"
Shrink / grow the focused window's height by 10 px.
.SS Window resize \(em coarse (50 px per press)
.TP
.BR "Shift+← " / " Shift+→"
Shrink / grow the focused window's width by 50 px.
.TP
.BR "Shift+↑ " / " Shift+↓"
Shrink / grow the focused window's height by 50 px.
.SS Gap adjustment
.TP
.B +
Increase the inner gap of the current workspace by 5 px.
.TP
.B -
Decrease the inner gap of the current workspace by 5 px.
.SS Exit
.TP
.BR Return " or " Escape
Return to default mode.
.SH NOTES
The mode file sets the default gaps applied at sway startup:
.B "gaps inner 5px"
and
.BR "gaps outer 5px" .
.PP
Both the primary arrow-key aliases
.RI ( $left ,
.IR $right ,
.IR $up ,
.IR $down )
and their alternate variants
.RI ( $left_alt ,
etc.) are bound, covering keyboard layout differences defined in
.IR ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf .
.PP
There is no waybar indicator, no script, and no signal associated with this mode.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/resize
Full mode definition: keybindings for resize and gap adjustment, plus the default
gap values applied at sway startup.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf
Defines the
.I $colorN
variables (e.g.\&
.IR $color5 ,
.IR $color10 )
referenced in the pango markup of
.IR $mode_resize .
The active theme is symlinked at runtime to
.I ~/.config/sway/definitions.d/theme.conf
(generated — not tracked in git).
See
.BR palette-theming (1)
for the full theming system.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR palette-theming (1)
