.TH SCRATCHPAD 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
scratchpad \- hidden window storage with waybar indicator for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The sway scratchpad is a hidden workspace that holds windows out of sight.
Any focused window can be sent there and retrieved on demand.
If multiple windows are stored, each retrieval cycles through them in order.
.PP
No named sway mode is entered to use the scratchpad; both bindings operate
from the default mode at all times.
After each operation, waybar is signaled (
.BR SIGRTMIN+7 )
to refresh the scratchpad indicator.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B $mod+Shift+minus
Send the focused window to the scratchpad.
.TP
.B $mod+minus
Show the next scratchpad window. If multiple windows are stored, repeated
presses cycle through them in order.
.SH WAYBAR INDICATOR
The
.B custom/scratchpad
module (signal 7) reflects the current scratchpad state.
.TP
.I Empty
The module is hidden.
.B scratchpad.sh
exits 1 when no windows are stored, which suppresses the
.B exec-if
check and removes the widget from the bar.
.TP
.I One window
Displays a single-window icon (class
.BR one ).
.TP
.I Two or more windows
Displays a stack icon (class
.BR many ).
.PP
The tooltip lists one line per stored window in the format
.IR "app_id | window title" .
Left-clicking the indicator runs
.B swaymsg 'scratchpad show'
(equivalent to pressing
.BR $mod+minus ).
.SH SCRIPT
.B scratchpad.sh
generates the JSON consumed by the waybar module:
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Queries the sway tree for the internal
.B __i3_scratch
node via
.BR "swaymsg -t get_tree" " | " "jq" .
.IP \n+[step].
Counts the
.B floating_nodes
inside that node to get the number of stored windows.
.IP \n+[step].
Exits 1 if the count is 0, hiding the waybar module.
.IP \n+[step].
Sets the output class to
.B one
(exactly one window) or
.B many
(two or more).
.IP \n+[step].
Builds the tooltip by joining each window's
.I app_id
(or
.I window_properties.class
for X11 windows) and its
.I name
field.
.IP \n+[step].
Outputs a JSON object:
.PP
.RS
.EX
{"text":"N", "class":"one|many", "alt":"one|many", "tooltip":"..."}
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/scratchpad
Keybinding definitions: send to scratchpad and show/cycle scratchpad.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/scratchpad.sh
Waybar indicator script: queries the sway tree and outputs JSON.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Defines the
.B custom/scratchpad
module (signal 7, format-icons for
.I one
and
.IR many ,
on-click action).
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/style.css
CSS for
.BR #custom-scratchpad .
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR jq (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR jq (1)
