.TH SCREENSHOTS 1 "2026-07-18" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
screenshots \- screenshot capture, editing, and notification system for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Screenshots functionality covers the full pipeline from capture to notification:
interactive region or output capture, annotation via
.BR swappy (1),
and two background daemons that fire desktop notifications when a screenshot is
saved to disk or copied to the clipboard.
.PP
The
.B Print
key is served by a dispatcher with two capture modes, toggled from an eww
desktop widget (circle button, camera icon, left of the bluetooth widget):
.TP
.B traditional
.B Print
enters the sway screenshot binding mode (menu: p / o / Shift+p / Shift+o) and
captures flow into
.BR swappy (1)
for annotation. The original behavior.
.TP
.B aggressive
.B Print
launches frozen region selection immediately and the selected area lands
straight in the Wayland clipboard. No menu, no editor, nothing written to
disk. Built for capture-heavy work sessions. The widget turns yellow
(border, icon, glow) while this mode is active.
.PP
The active mode lives in
.IR ~/.local/state/screenshot-mode/mode ;
clicking the widget flips it and a notification confirms the new mode.
.PP
Four scripts handle the distinct roles:
.TP
.B screenshot-dispatch.sh
Bound to
.BR Print .
Reads the state file and routes: traditional \[->] enters the screenshot
binding mode (its pango name is resolved live from
.BR "swaymsg \-t get_binding_modes" ,
the only mode containing \(lqPick\(rq); aggressive \[->] runs
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
and pipes the cropped PNG to
.BR wl-copy (1).
.TP
.B screenshot-frozen.sh
Used for region capture. Captures a full-screen PNG with
.BR grim (1),
displays it fullscreen with
.BR swayimg (1)
to produce a "frozen" visual, then launches
.BR slurp (1)
for interactive area selection. After selection, crops the chosen region out of
the frozen PNG using ImageMagick and writes the result to stdout. The caller
(the
.I $pipe_selection
variable) pipes this output directly into
.BR swappy (1).
.TP
.B screenshot-notify.sh
Daemon. Monitors
.I ~/Screenshots
(or
.IR $XDG_SCREENSHOTS_DIR )
using
.BR inotifywait (1).
When a PNG file is written (
.B close_write
event), fires a
.BR notify-send (1)
notification. Uses a lockfile and debounce logic to prevent duplicate
notifications. Managed by
.IR screenshot-notify.service .
.TP
.B screenshot-clipboard-notify.sh
Daemon. Uses
.B wl-paste --watch
to monitor the Wayland clipboard. When the clipboard contains a PNG image,
fires a
.BR notify-send (1)
notification. Uses a lockfile and debounce (500 ms) to prevent duplicates
when multiple clipboard events fire in quick succession. Managed by
.IR screenshot-clipboard-notify.service .
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.B Print
dispatches according to the capture mode. In
.B aggressive
mode it goes straight to frozen region selection and copies the area to the
clipboard. In
.B traditional
mode it enters the screenshot binding mode:
.TP
.B p
Pick region \(em launches
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
(frozen screen + slurp selection), pipes result into
.BR swappy (1).
.TP
.B o
Output \(em captures the current monitor with
.BR grimshot (1),
pipes into
.BR swappy (1).
.TP
.B Shift+p
Pick region and upload the PNG to x0.at; URL copied to clipboard and shown in a notification.
.TP
.B Shift+o
Output capture and upload to x0.at; URL copied to clipboard and shown in a notification.
.TP
.B Escape
Return to default mode without capturing.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/screenshot-dispatch.sh
Print-key dispatcher; routes to the binding mode (traditional) or frozen
region \[->] clipboard (aggressive) based on the state file.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/screenshot-mode/mode
Capture-mode state file, contents
.B traditional
or
.BR aggressive .
Shared source of truth between the dispatcher and the eww widget. Created on
demand; missing file means traditional.
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/widgets/screenshot-mode.yuck
Desktop toggle widget (window
.BR screenshot-mode-widget ,
BT-circle style, geometry x 1320 y 910 anchor bottom-left, left of
.BR bt-widget ).
Pure ASCII \(em the nerd-font camera icon travels inside the subscribe
script's JSON, dnd-style.
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/scripts/screenshot-mode-subscribe.sh
eww deflisten feed; emits mode+icon JSON at start and on every state-file
change via
.BR inotifywait (1)
on the dedicated state directory (no polling).
.TP
.I ~/.config/eww/scripts/screenshot-mode-toggle.sh
Widget click action: flips the state file atomically (tmp + rename) and
fires a confirmation notification.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/screenshot-frozen.sh
Frozen-screen region capture; outputs cropped PNG to stdout.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/screenshot-notify.sh
Daemon: save-to-disk notification via
.BR inotifywait (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/screenshot-clipboard-notify.sh
Daemon: clipboard PNG notification via
.BR wl-paste (1)
--watch.
.TP
.I ~/.config/swappy/config
swappy editor configuration: save directory, filename format, panel defaults.
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/screenshot-notify.service
Systemd user unit for the save-notification daemon. Enabled for
.IR sway-session.target .
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/screenshot-clipboard-notify.service
Systemd user unit for the clipboard-notification daemon. Enabled for
.IR sway-session.target .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/screenshot
Sway mode configuration: defines
.I $mode_screenshot
and all keybindings, including the
.B Print
entry binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf
Defines
.IR $grimshot ,
.IR $pipe_output ,
.IR $pipe_selection ,
.IR $swappy ,
.IR $upload_pipe ,
the composite
.I $screenshot_screen
/
.I $screenshot_selection
(with optional upload variants), and
.I $screenshot_dispatch
(the Print-key entry point).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/autostart
Defines
.I $swappy_notify
and
.I $screenshot_clipboard_notify
variables (daemon restart commands).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/99-autostart-applications.conf
Calls
.I $swappy_notify
and
.I $screenshot_clipboard_notify
inside
.B exec_always
so both daemons restart on every sway reload.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf
Defines the
.I $colorN
variables (e.g.\&
.IR $color5 ,
.IR $color7 ,
.IR $color10 )
referenced in the pango markup of
.IR $mode_screenshot .
The active theme is symlinked at runtime to
.I ~/.config/sway/definitions.d/theme.conf
(generated \(em not tracked in git).
See
.BR palette-theming (1)
for the full theming system.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR grim (1),
.BR slurp (1),
.BR swayimg (1),
.BR magick / convert
(ImageMagick),
.BR swappy (1),
.BR inotifywait (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR wl-paste (1),
.BR wl-copy (1),
.BR jq (1)
(dispatcher mode-name lookup),
.BR curl (1)
(upload to x0.at)
.SH DAEMONS
Both notification daemons run as systemd user services under
.IR sway-session.target .
They are started (or restarted) every time sway reloads, via
.B exec_always
in
.IR 99-autostart-applications.conf .
.TP
.B screenshot-notify.service
Wraps
.IR screenshot-notify.sh .
The unit clears
.I /tmp/screenshot-notify.lock
via
.B ExecStartPre
before each start to prevent stale lockfile issues.
.TP
.B screenshot-clipboard-notify.service
Wraps
.IR screenshot-clipboard-notify.sh .
.SH FLOW
.SS Capture flow (traditional, region example)
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
User presses
.B Print
\[->]
.I screenshot-dispatch.sh
reads the state file (traditional) \[->] sway enters
.I $mode_screenshot
.IP \n+[step].
User presses
.B p
\[->] sway exits mode and executes
.I $screenshot_selection
.IP \n+[step].
.I $screenshot_selection
=
.I $pipe_selection
|
.I $swappy
: runs
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
piped into
.B swappy -f -
.IP \n+[step].
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
captures full screen \[->] displays it with
.BR swayimg (1)
under a dedicated app_id, forced tiled so the fullscreen covers the whole output
\[->] user draws selection with
.BR slurp (1)
.IP \n+[step].
Crops region from frozen PNG using ImageMagick \[->] writes PNG bytes to stdout
.IP \n+[step].
.BR swappy (1)
receives PNG on stdin, opens editor with annotation tools
.IP \n+[step].
User saves or copies; swappy exits
.SS Capture flow (aggressive)
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
User presses
.B Print
\[->] dispatcher sees
.B aggressive
\[->] runs
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
directly (frozen screen + slurp selection, same freeze mechanics as
traditional)
.IP \n+[step].
Cropped PNG lands in a private temp file; on a cancelled selection (Escape)
nothing is copied \(em the clipboard is never clobbered with an empty PNG
.IP \n+[step].
.BR wl-copy (1)
places the PNG in the Wayland clipboard; the temp file is removed
.IP \n+[step].
.I screenshot-clipboard-notify.sh
fires the \(lqScreenshot copied to clipboard\(rq toast \(em the aggressive
path has no notification of its own
.SS Notification flow (save)
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
swappy saves PNG to
.I ~/Screenshots/
.IP \n+[step].
.I screenshot-notify.sh
detects
.B close_write
on the directory via
.BR inotifywait (1)
.IP \n+[step].
Debounce check (100 ms) prevents duplicate events
.IP \n+[step].
.BR notify-send (1)
fires "Screenshot saved" notification with an explicit
.B "\-t 5000"
so it auto-dismisses after 5 s
.SS Notification flow (clipboard copy)
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
swappy copies PNG to Wayland clipboard
.IP \n+[step].
.B wl-paste --watch
in
.I screenshot-clipboard-notify.sh
fires callback script
.IP \n+[step].
Callback checks MIME type; if
.BR image/png ,
debounce check (500 ms) runs under
.BR flock (1)
.IP \n+[step].
.BR notify-send (1)
fires "Screenshot copied to clipboard" notification with an explicit
.B "\-t 5000"
so it auto-dismisses after 5 s
.SH STORAGE
Screenshots are saved to
.I ~/Screenshots/
by default. Override by setting
.B XDG_SCREENSHOTS_DIR
in your environment before starting sway.
.PP
The swappy filename format is configured in
.I ~/.config/swappy/config
as
.BR save_filename_format=%Y-%m-%d-%H%M%S_swappy.png .
.SH GOTCHAS
.TP
.B The freeze overlay must be tiled, not floating
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
launches the
.BR swayimg (1)
freeze under a dedicated app_id
.RB ( screenshot-freeze )
and forces it tiled
.RB ( "floating disable" )
before
.BR slurp (1)
runs. On SwayFX a floating window that requests fullscreen keeps the offset the
.I floating-placer.py
/
.I floating-memory.py
daemons assign it, so its rect lands at e.g.\& 952,43 instead of 0,0 and no
longer covers the output \(em the live desktop bleeds through the uncovered area
(the "glitch" symptom). A tiled fullscreen window always covers the output at
0,0. Keep the freeze out of the generic
.RB ' swayimg '
floating rule in
.IR 98-application-defaults.conf .
.TP
.B swayimg 5.x renders the frozen image scaled-down by default
swayimg 5.0 and newer default to
.B optimal
scale (not 1:1, even when image and window dimensions match). The
.B \-e
flag is a Lua script as of 5.0 (formerly a plain command API); pass
.B "swayimg.viewer.set_default_scale('real')"
in it or the frozen capture is visibly scaled.
.BR swayimg.text.hide ()
and
.B set_default_scale
both still exist in the 5.3 Lua API \(em the breakage was never the API.
.TP
.B swayimg renames CLI flags between minor releases
swayimg 5.3 (released 2026-06-18) removed
.B \-\-class
in favor of
.BR \-\-appid =ID
for setting the Wayland app_id. The freeze launch in
.I screenshot-frozen.sh
passed
.BR \-\-class ,
so under 5.3 swayimg aborts at startup (unrecognized option) and the overlay
never maps. Because the script runs under
.B set \-e
and the following
.BR swaymsg (1)
floating-disable returns exit 2 (\(lqNo matching node\(rq) when the window is
absent, the whole script aborts there \(em before
.BR slurp (1)
\(em so nothing reaches
.BR swappy (1):
the screenshot mode menu shows but no capture happens. Fix: use
.B \-\-appid
and append
.B "|| true"
to that
.BR swaymsg
call so a swayimg-launch failure degrades to a non-frozen capture instead of
total silence. The Lua API (swayimg.text.hide, set_default_scale) is unchanged
in 5.3 \(em the breakage is the CLI, not the API.
.TP
.B Wait for the overlay to map, not a blind sleep
The script polls the sway tree until the freeze window appears before forcing it
tiled; a fixed
.B sleep
races swayimg's map and paint on a busy system.
.TP
.B Screenshot notifications need an explicit timeout
mako runs with
.B default-timeout=0
in
.IR ~/.config/mako/config ,
so every notification persists until clicked (intentional \(em chat messages
must not be missed). The two screenshot daemons therefore pass an explicit
.B "\-t 5000"
to
.BR notify-send (1)
so the "Screenshot saved" and "Screenshot copied to clipboard" confirmations
auto-dismiss after 5 s without touching the global policy. mako honors a
per-notification timeout over
.B default-timeout
only while
.B ignore-timeout=0
(its default); flipping that to 1 would make mako ignore the
.B "\-t"
and the confirmations would linger again.
.TP
.B The screenshot binding mode's name is a ~300-char pango string
Theme colors are expanded into the mode name when sway parses the config, so
the name changes with the active palette. Never hardcode it.
.I screenshot-dispatch.sh
resolves it live: the only entry of
.B swaymsg \-t get_binding_modes
containing \(lqPick\(rq, passed back wrapped in double quotes inside the
command string (the name contains spaces and single quotes; double quotes
inside survive because pango markup only uses single quotes).
.TP
.B Aggressive mode's toast comes from the clipboard daemon
The dispatcher never calls
.BR notify-send (1)
on success; if
.B screenshot-clipboard-notify.service
is down, aggressive captures still work but confirm silently.
.TP
.B The eww toggle widget stays ASCII on purpose
The camera glyph (U+F0104, PUA) is emitted by
.I screenshot-mode-subscribe.sh
as escaped bytes inside the JSON payload \(em same pattern as the dnd
subscribe script \(em so no PUA character ever lives in a yuck file where a
Write-style rewrite could silently destroy it.
.TP
.B Nerd-font icons render right-shifted in GTK labels
In \(lqJetBrainsMono Nerd Font\(rq (non-Mono) the U+F0104 glyph's ink at
30px is 25px wide inside an 18px pango advance box \(em 7px of right
overflow. GTK centers the advance box, not the ink, so the icon sat
+3.5px right of the circle's center. Fix in
.IR screenshot-mode.scss :
.B "padding-right: 7px"
on the icon label \(em exactly the overflow \(em makes the ink span
symmetric (correct in both the fill and centered label layout models).
Measure the overflow with pango directly,
.B layout.get_pixel_extents()
via python3-gi (ink vs logical extents); do not eyeball the padding. This
applies to any eww widget using nf-md glyphs.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grim (1),
.BR slurp (1),
.BR swappy (1),
.BR inotifywait (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
