.TH SHUTDOWN 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
shutdown \- power menu mode for sway (lock, logout, reboot, suspend, shutdown)
.SH DESCRIPTION
The shutdown mode presents a power menu with five system actions.
It is entered via keyboard shortcut or the hardware power button, and exits
immediately after an action is executed or on
.BR Escape .
.PP
The sway bar displays a pango-markup label showing a power icon followed by:
.BR "(l)" lock,
.BR "(e)" logout,
.BR "(r)" reboot,
.BR "(u)" suspend,
and
.BR "(s)" shutdown.
The label colors come from
.I $color5
and
.I $color10
of the active palette theme.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
The mode can be entered in two ways:
.TP
.B $mod+Shift+e
Keyboard shortcut (defined in
.IR ~/.config/sway/modes/shutdown ).
.TP
.B XF86PowerOff
Hardware power button (defined in
.IR ~/.config/sway/modes/default ).
.PP
Inside the mode:
.TP
.B l
Lock the screen. Executes
.I $locking
(defined in
.IR ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf ).
See
.BR lock-screen (1).
.TP
.B e
Log out of sway. Executes
.BR "swaymsg exit" .
.TP
.B r
Reboot the system. Executes
.BR "systemctl reboot" .
.TP
.B u
Secure suspend: locks the screen first, then suspends. Executes
.IR secure-suspend.sh .
See
.BR lock-screen (1).
.TP
.B s
Shut down the system. Executes
.BR "systemctl poweroff" .
.TP
.B Escape
Cancel and return to default mode without taking any action.
.SH NOTES
Clipboard history is intentionally preserved across logout and shutdown.
An optional purge on logout can be enabled by setting
.B $purge_cliphist_logout
to
.B 'true'
in
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf
and uncommenting the corresponding line in the mode file.
.PP
The pango markup uses
.I $color5
and
.I $color10
from the active palette theme.
These variables are defined in
.IR ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf
and symlinked at runtime to
.I ~/.config/sway/definitions.d/theme.conf
(generated \(em not tracked in git).
See
.BR palette-theming (1).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/shutdown
Mode definition: pango label, all keybindings, and the
.B $mod+Shift+e
entry binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/default
Defines the
.B XF86PowerOff
entry binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/01-definitions.conf
Defines the
.I $locking
variable used by the
.B l
binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/secure-suspend.sh
Lock-then-suspend script invoked by the
.B u
binding.
See
.BR lock-screen (1)
for full documentation.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf
Defines
.I $color5
and
.I $color10
for the pango mode label.
Active theme symlinked at runtime; see
.BR palette-theming (1).
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR lock-screen (1),
.BR palette-theming (1)
