.TH SSH-TMUX 1 "2025-12-28" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ssh-tmux, ssht \- SSH wrapper with persistent tmux sessions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ssh-tmux
.I host
.RI [ session_name ]
.br
.B ssht
.I host
.RI [ session_name ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ssh-tmux
connects to a remote host via SSH and automatically creates or attaches to a tmux session. This allows your work to persist even if:
.IP \(bu 2
Computer is suspended/hibernated
.IP \(bu
Network connection drops
.IP \(bu
SSH connection times out
.PP
Perfect for long-running tasks like Claude Code CLI sessions with pending questions.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I host
SSH host (e.g., hostinger-vps). Must be a valid host configured in
.IR ~/.ssh/config .
.TP
.I session_name
Optional tmux session name (default: "default"). Use descriptive names like "work", "blindando", or "finanzas" to organize different projects.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Connect to VPS with session named "work":
.RS
.nf
ssh-tmux hostinger-vps work
ssht hostinger-vps work
.fi
.RE
.PP
Connect with default session name:
.RS
.nf
ssh-tmux hostinger-vps
ssht hostinger-vps
.fi
.RE
.PP
After suspend/resume, reconnect to same session:
.RS
.nf
ssht hostinger-vps work    # Everything is as you left it!
.fi
.RE
.SH TMUX BASICS
Once connected, you can use these tmux keybindings:
.TP
.B Ctrl+b d
Detach from session (leaves it running on server)
.TP
.B Ctrl+b ?
Show all tmux keybindings
.TP
.B Ctrl+b c
Create new window within session
.TP
.B Ctrl+b n
Next window
.TP
.B Ctrl+b p
Previous window
.TP
.B Ctrl+b ,
Rename current window
.TP
.B Ctrl+b %
Split window vertically
.TP
.B Ctrl+b "
Split window horizontally
.PP
Inside SSH session, you can also run:
.TP
.B tmux ls
List all active tmux sessions
.TP
.B tmux attach -t name
Attach to specific session by name
.TP
.B tmux kill-session -t name
Kill specific session by name
.SH WORKFLOW
.PP
Typical workflow for persistent sessions:
.IP 1. 4
Start working on a project:
.RS
.nf
ssht hostinger-vps blindando
.fi
.RE
.IP 2.
Work normally (Claude Code CLI, vim, etc.)
.IP 3.
Computer gets suspended or connection drops
.IP 4.
Later, reconnect to continue exactly where you left off:
.RS
.nf
ssht hostinger-vps blindando
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/tmux/tmux.conf
tmux configuration file with vi mode and custom styling
.TP
.I ~/.config/tmux/README.md
Complete tmux guide with examples
.TP
.I ~/.ssh/config
SSH configuration with keepalive settings
.SH NOTES
.PP
.B ssh-tmux
uses SSH keepalive to maintain connections during short network interruptions (configured via
.IR ~/.ssh/config ).
However, tmux is the real solution for persistent sessions across long suspends.
.PP
tmux sessions run on the
.BR server ,
not your local machine. This means your work persists even if you close your terminal, suspend your computer, or lose network connection.
.SH AUTHOR
Created for persistent SSH workflows, particularly for Claude Code CLI sessions.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ssh (1),
.BR tmux (1),
.BR ssh_config (5)
.PP
Full guide:
.I ~/.config/tmux/README.md
.PP
Sway cheatsheet: Press
.B Super+/
to see quick reference.
