.TH SWAP 1 "2026-03-15" "sway dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
swap \- two-step window position swap mode for sway
.SH DESCRIPTION
Swap mode lets the user exchange the positions of any two tiled windows using
keyboard navigation and a two-step mark/execute flow.
.PP
The mode operates in two phases, each with its own named sub-mode and pango
label in the sway bar.
Unlike other modes, the pango labels use hardcoded hex color values rather than
.I $colorN
theme variables, so they are independent of the active palette theme.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
Enter swap mode by pressing
.BR $mod+Ctrl+w .
.SS Phase 1 \(em select target ($mode_swap_select)
The sway bar displays: a shuffle icon, the label
.BR "Swap Mode" ,
the hint
.BR "(↑ ↓ ← → navigate)" ,
.BR "Mark Target" ,
and
.BR "(Enter or Click)" .
.PP
Navigation focuses windows without swapping:
.TP
.BR "← ↓ ↑ →"
Move focus left, down, up, or right.
.TP
.BR "h j k l"
Vim-key equivalents for left, down, up, right.
.PP
Actions:
.TP
.BR Return " or left click (whole window)"
Mark the focused window as the swap target.
Runs
.I swap-mark-target.sh
and transitions to phase 2
.RI ( $mode_swap_target ).
.TP
.B Escape
Cancel swap mode. Runs
.I swap-cleanup.sh
and returns to default mode.
.SS Phase 2 \(em select second window ($mode_swap_target)
The sway bar displays: a target icon, the label
.BR "Target Marked!" ,
.BR "Select Second Window" ,
and
.BR "(↑ ↓ ← → navigate, Enter or Click)" .
.PP
Navigation is identical to phase 1 (arrow keys and vim keys).
.PP
Actions:
.TP
.BR Return " or left click (whole window)"
Execute the swap between the marked target and the currently focused window.
Runs
.I swap-execute.sh
and returns to default mode.
.TP
.B Escape
Cancel and discard the marked target. Runs
.I swap-cleanup.sh
and returns to default mode.
.SH SCRIPTS
.SS swap-mark-target.sh
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Marks the focused window:
.B "swaymsg mark swap_target"
.IP \n+[step].
Transitions to phase 2:
.B "swaymsg mode '$mode_swap_target'"
.IP \n+[step].
Signals waybar (SIGRTMIN+7) to refresh.
.SS swap-execute.sh
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Verifies the mark exists via
.BR "swaymsg -t get_marks" ;
exits 1 if
.B swap_target
is not found.
.IP \n+[step].
Executes the swap:
.B "swaymsg swap container with mark swap_target"
.IP \n+[step].
Removes the mark:
.B "swaymsg '[con_mark=\(dqswap_target\(dq] unmark'"
.IP \n+[step].
Signals waybar (SIGRTMIN+7) to refresh.
.SS swap-cleanup.sh
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Silently removes the mark if present:
.B "swaymsg '[con_mark=\(dqswap_target\(dq] unmark'"
(stderr discarded).
.IP \n+[step].
Signals waybar (SIGRTMIN+7) to refresh.
.SH NOTES
There is no dedicated waybar indicator for swap mode.
The SIGRTMIN+7 signal sent by all three scripts refreshes the scratchpad module
(signal 7) as a side effect of the window tree changing.
.PP
Both arrow keys and vim keys
.RB ( h / j / k / l )
are active in both phases.
.PP
The pango markup in this mode uses hardcoded hex color values and does not
depend on
.IR ~/.config/sway/themes/<name>/theme.conf .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/modes/swap
Both sub-mode definitions
.RI ( $mode_swap_select
and
.IR $mode_swap_target )
and the
.B $mod+Ctrl+w
entry binding.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/swap-mark-target.sh
Marks the focused window and transitions to phase 2.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/swap-execute.sh
Validates the mark, executes the swap, and cleans up.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/swap-cleanup.sh
Removes any leftover
.B swap_target
mark on cancel or exit.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR pkill (1)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swaymsg (1)
