.TH USB\-MANAGEMENT 1 "2026\-03\-01" "dotfiles" "USB Management Manual"
.SH NAME
usb\-management \- USB storage device management system for sway/waybar
.SH DESCRIPTION
The USB management system provides interactive mount, unmount, eject, and
file manager integration for USB storage devices in a sway/Wayland environment.
.PP
The waybar module polls device status every 5 seconds and displays an icon
that brightens when a USB device is detected.
A right\-click context menu provides access to all actions.
When multiple devices are connected, a rofi picker appears for selection;
single\-device operations execute automatically without prompting.
.SH USAGE
.TP
.B Waybar right\-click
Opens the GTK context menu
.RI ( usb\-menu.xml )
with the following options:
.RS
.TP
.B Open in File Manager
Calls
.B usb\-action\-open.sh
\(em opens the mount point in the default file manager.
.TP
.B Unmount
Calls
.B usb\-action\-unmount.sh
\(em unmounts the selected partition.
.TP
.B Eject
Calls
.B usb\-action\-eject.sh
\(em unmounts all partitions and powers off the physical disk.
.TP
.B Mount
Calls
.B usb\-action\-mount.sh
\(em mounts the selected unmounted partition.
.TP
.B Refresh
Calls
.B usb\-action\-refresh.sh
\(em forces the waybar module to re\-poll device status.
.RE
.PP
Scripts can also be invoked directly from the command line for scripting or
debugging purposes.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-monitor.sh
Core detection script.
Uses
.BR lsblk (8)
to enumerate removable USB storage devices and outputs JSON
(text, icon glyph, CSS class, tooltip) consumed by the waybar module.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-monitor\-wrapper.sh
Thin wrapper around
.I usb\-monitor.sh
that suppresses stderr so the waybar module receives clean JSON.
This is the file configured as the module
.B exec
command.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-action\-mount.sh
Mounts unmounted USB partitions via
.BR udisksctl (1).
Auto\-mounts if one device is found; opens a rofi picker for multiple.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-action\-unmount.sh
Unmounts mounted USB partitions via
.BR udisksctl (1).
Shows mount points in the picker menu for clarity.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-action\-eject.sh
Safely removes USB devices.
Unlike mount/unmount (which operate on partitions), eject operates on the
.B physical disk
\(em it unmounts all its partitions then calls
.B udisksctl power\-off
to safely remove the hardware.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-action\-open.sh
Opens the mount point of a mounted USB partition in the default file manager
using
.BR xdg\-open (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/usb\-action\-refresh.sh
Sends signal RTMIN+15 to the waybar process to force a module refresh,
then shows a low\-urgency notification.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rofi/themes/usb\-manager.rasi
Rofi theme (gray/monochrome palette) applied by all action scripts that
display a device picker.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/usb\-menu.xml
GTK interface definition for the right\-click context menu on the waybar
.B custom/usb
module.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Waybar module configuration
.RI ( custom/usb ).
Polls
.I usb\-monitor\-wrapper.sh
every 5 seconds, listens on signal RTMIN+15, and maps menu actions to
the action scripts via
.BR menu\-actions .
.SH PROGRAMS
The following programs must be installed for this functionality to work:
.TP
.B lsblk
Lists block devices.
Used by all scripts to enumerate and filter USB storage devices.
Provided by
.IR util\-linux .
.TP
.B udisksctl
Performs mount, unmount, and power\-off operations via D\-Bus (UDisks2).
Provided by
.IR udisks2 .
.TP
.B rofi
Displays the interactive device picker when multiple devices are present.
.TP
.B notify\-send
Shows desktop notifications for operation results.
Provided by
.IR libnotify .
.TP
.B xdg\-open
Opens the mount point in the default file manager.
Provided by
.IR xdg\-utils .
.TP
.B pkill
Used by action scripts to send RTMIN+15 to waybar after operations.
Provided by
.IR procps .
.SH WAYBAR INTEGRATION
The module is defined in
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
as
.BR custom/usb :
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B exec
.I usb\-monitor\-wrapper.sh
(polled every 5 seconds)
.TP
.B signal
15 (RTMIN+15 \(em sent by action scripts after operations)
.TP
.B menu
.I usb\-menu.xml
(right\-click GTK context menu)
.TP
.B menu\-actions
Maps menu item IDs to the five action scripts
.RE
.PP
The icon dims when no USB storage is detected and brightens when a device
is present, via CSS classes set in the JSON output of
.IR usb\-monitor.sh .
.SH NOTES
Action scripts (mount, unmount, eject, open) use a consistent pattern:
if exactly one eligible device is found, the operation proceeds automatically
without opening a picker.
If multiple devices are found, rofi displays a selection menu using the
.I usb\-manager.rasi
theme.
.PP
Eject operates on the
.B physical disk
(e.g.,
.IR /dev/sda ),
not on individual partitions.
It unmounts every partition on the disk before calling
.BR "udisksctl power\-off" .
All other actions operate on individual
.B partitions
(e.g.,
.IR /dev/sda1 ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR udisksctl (1),
.BR lsblk (8),
.BR rofi (1),
.BR notify\-send (1),
.BR xdg\-open (1),
.BR pkill (1)
