.TH VOICE-DICTATION 1 "2026-06-01" "1.0" "sway dotfiles"
.SH NAME
voice-dictation \- system-wide push-to-talk voice dictation (speech-to-text) into the clipboard
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Voice Dictation system lets you press a key, speak, and paste the
transcribed text into any application. It runs fully offline using
.BR voxtype (1)
as a systemd user daemon, the
.B whisper.cpp
engine (Whisper
.B small
multilingual model) for Spanish/English speech-to-text, and a PipeWire
.B rnnoise
noise-cancelling source so the microphone is cleaned before transcription.
.PP
It is toggle-driven: one keypress starts recording, a second stops it and
transcribes. The result is placed on the Wayland clipboard to paste with
.BR Ctrl+V ,
and a desktop notification shows the transcribed text.
.PP
Whisper inference runs on the GPU via the Vulkan backend \[em] specifically
the Intel HD 530 iGPU, which outperforms the discrete NVIDIA Quadro M1000M
for this workload (see
.BR "HARDWARE NOTES" ).
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B Ctrl+Shift+space
Toggle dictation. First press starts recording; second press stops and
transcribes. Bound in
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/85-dictation.conf
to
.IR "voxtype record toggle" .
.SH USAGE
.RS
.nf
1. Place the cursor where you want the text (or anywhere \[em] output is clipboard).
2. Press Ctrl+Shift+space and speak in Spanish or English.
3. Press Ctrl+Shift+space again to stop and transcribe.
4. A notification shows the text; it is now on the clipboard.
5. Paste with Ctrl+V.
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.SS Engine and daemon
.TP
.I /usr/bin/voxtype
The voxtype binary (package \fBvoxtype-bin\fR). Runs as a daemon.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/voxtype.service
Systemd user unit (enabled \[em] starts on login). Runs \fIvoxtype -q daemon\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/voxtype/config.toml
Main configuration. Key settings: \fBmodel\fR=small, \fBlanguage\fR=es,
\fBeager_processing\fR=true, \fB[vad]\fR enabled=true / threshold=0.6,
\fBinitial_prompt\fR (short list of terms/names), \fB[output] mode\fR=clipboard,
\fB[audio] device\fR=pulse, \fB[hotkey] enabled\fR=false (recording is driven by
the sway keybinding, not voxtype's own hotkey detection).
.TP
.I /usr/lib/voxtype/voxtype-vulkan
Active binary variant (Whisper, Vulkan backend). Selected with
.IR "voxtype setup gpu --enable" .
.SS Models
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/voxtype/models/ggml-small.bin
Whisper small multilingual model (466 MB). The active model.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/voxtype/models/ggml-silero-vad.bin
Silero VAD model. Trims silence so Whisper does not hallucinate on it.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/voxtype/models/ggml-base.bin
Whisper base model (142 MB). Optional faster/less-accurate fallback; not active.
.SS Noise suppression (microphone)
.TP
.I ~/.config/pipewire/filter-chain.conf.d/99-rnnoise-mic.conf
PipeWire filter-chain definition. Loads the rnnoise LADSPA plugin and exposes
a virtual source \fBrnnoise_source\fR that captures from the real mic (via
\fBtarget.object\fR) and outputs a denoised stream. Given high
\fBpriority.session\fR so it is chosen as the default source.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/ladspa/librnnoise_ladspa.so
The rnnoise LADSPA plugin (package \fBnoise-suppression-for-voice\fR). Labels:
\fBnoise_suppressor_mono\fR / \fBnoise_suppressor_stereo\fR.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/filter-chain.service
PipeWire filter-chain systemd user unit (enabled). Loads the config above and
creates \fBrnnoise_source\fR on login.
.SS Sway integration
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/85-dictation.conf
Sway keybinding file. Binds \fBCtrl+Shift+space\fR (through the \fB$bindsym\fR
alias = \fIbindsym --to-code\fR) to \fIvoxtype record toggle\fR. Loaded by the
\fIinclude ~/.config/sway/config.d/*\fR line in the main sway config.
.SH AUDIO PIPELINE
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
The microphone (\fIalsa_input.pci-0000_00_1f.3.analog-stereo\fR) captures raw audio.
.IP \n+[step].
The PipeWire filter-chain (\fBfilter-chain.service\fR) feeds it through the
rnnoise plugin \[->] denoised virtual source \fBrnnoise_source\fR, set as the
default system source.
.IP \n+[step].
On \fIvoxtype record toggle\fR, the voxtype daemon captures from the default
source (device \fBpulse\fR) while recording.
.IP \n+[step].
On the second toggle, recording stops. The Silero VAD trims silence, then
whisper.cpp (small, Vulkan / Intel HD 530) transcribes the speech.
.IP \n+[step].
The text is copied to the Wayland clipboard (\fBwl-copy\fR) and shown in a
notification. Paste with \fBCtrl+V\fR.
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR voxtype (1),
.BR pw-link (1),
.BR pactl (1),
.BR wpctl (1),
.BR wl-copy (1),
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B voxtype-bin
The dictation engine/daemon (AUR). Bundles whisper.cpp plus several ASR engines.
.TP
.B noise-suppression-for-voice
rnnoise LADSPA plugin for the PipeWire noise-cancelling source.
.TP
.B PipeWire
Audio server. Provides \fBfilter-chain.service\fR, \fBwl-copy\fR, and the
virtual-source mechanism.
.TP
.B wtype
Wayland virtual-keyboard typing \[em] voxtype's default output driver. Clipboard
mode is used here instead, but wtype remains the type-mode fallback.
.SH HARDWARE NOTES
This machine is an i7-6820HQ (2015) with an Intel HD 530 iGPU and a discrete
NVIDIA Quadro M1000M (Maxwell, 2 GB).
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBIntel HD 530 (Vulkan) beats the NVIDIA M1000M\fR for whisper.cpp: the Maxwell
GPU lacks fast FP16 (\fBfp16=0\fR), the Intel iGPU has it (\fBfp16=1\fR). Forcing
NVIDIA with \fBVOXTYPE_VULKAN_DEVICE=nvidia\fR was slower.
.IP \[bu]
\fBfaster-whisper / CTranslate2 does not run on the M1000M\fR (Compute Capability
5.0 is below the 5.3/7.0 needed; only 2 GB VRAM; CUDA 13 installed vs the
required 12.3 + cuDNN 9). This rules out GPU tools built on CTranslate2, such as
whisper-overlay.
.IP \[bu]
Measured latency (audio ~5\[en]7 s): small/CPU ~22 s, small/Vulkan-NVIDIA ~20 s,
small/Vulkan-Intel ~13 s, \fBbase/Vulkan-Intel ~2 s\fR, large-v3-turbo/Vulkan-Intel
~33 s. \fBsmall\fR is the accuracy/speed balance chosen for daily use.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBvoxtype does not accept PulseAudio source names\fR as \fBdevice\fR \[em] only
\fBdefault\fR/\fBpulse\fR/\fBpipewire\fR/\fBlavrate\fR. To target the rnnoise
source, set it as the default source and use \fBdevice = "pulse"\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fBNoiseTorch does not work on pure PipeWire\fR (its \fBmodule-ladspa-source\fR
load fails with "No such entity"). The native PipeWire filter-chain is used instead.
The base \fBrnnoise\fR package ships only the library; the LADSPA plugin comes from
\fBnoise-suppression-for-voice\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fBvoxtype setup --download --model small\fR ambiguously resolves \fBsmall\fR to the
SenseVoice engine (not compiled). Put the model in \fIconfig.toml\fR and run
\fBvoxtype setup --download\fR without \fB--model\fR, or fetch the ggml file
directly from HuggingFace (huggingface.co/ggerganov/whisper.cpp).
.IP \[bu]
Whisper hallucinates filler at the end of clips ("Suscríbete", "Chau", "gmail")
\[em] an artifact of its YouTube-subtitle training. The Silero VAD reduces it;
raising \fB[vad] threshold\fR above 0.6 starts clipping the start of speech.
.IP \[bu]
\fBinitial_prompt\fR improves technical terms and proper names, but Whisper
regurgitates it at the end of clips if it is long \[em] keep it short.
.IP \[bu]
A binding applied live with \fBswaymsg\fR is lost when sway restarts; the
\fIconfig.d/\fR file persists it across restarts.
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Recordings are \fBnot\fR saved to disk \[em] voxtype transcribes in memory and
discards the audio. No recordings accumulate.
.IP \[bu]
Both \fBvoxtype.service\fR and \fBfilter-chain.service\fR are enabled and start on
login, so the system is ready after a reboot.
.IP \[bu]
For higher quality, the realistic paths are a USB microphone (attacks the
root cause \[em] laptop mic + ambient noise) or a remote backend (whisper.cpp
server with large-v3 on a powerful host; voxtype supports \fBbackend = "remote"\fR).
.IP \[bu]
Distinct from \fBmeeting-notes\fR(1), which records and transcribes whole meetings
to a file with speaker diarization. Voice Dictation is short, real-time dictation
to the clipboard.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR voxtype (1),
.BR meeting-notes (1),
.BR pw-link (1),
.BR wpctl (1),
.BR pactl (1),
.BR sway (5)
