.TH WHATSAPP 1 "2026-06-04" "1.0" "sway dotfiles"
.SH NAME
whatsapp \- WhatsApp in the terminal (nchat) with scratchpad tray, desktop notifications and an unread badge
.SH DESCRIPTION
A terminal WhatsApp client built on
.BR nchat (1)
(a ncurses TUI that links as a WhatsApp Web device via the whatsmeow library).
It replaces Altus (an Electron client that grew a multi-day memory leak and was
OOM-killed). nchat runs as a supervised
.B systemd --user
service inside a dedicated
.BR foot (1)
terminal whose app_id is
.IR nchat ,
so sway rules and keybindings can target it.
.PP
There is no real system tray for a TUI, so the sway
.BR scratchpad (1)
plays that role: nchat is born hidden in the scratchpad and is shown or hidden on
demand. Incoming messages raise a
.BR mako (5)
notification and light a red, blinking WhatsApp icon in
.BR waybar (5);
clicking the notification brings nchat to the current workspace.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.I $mod+Shift+q
The normal "close window" key, intercepted: if the focused window is nchat it is
hidden to the scratchpad (kept alive, still receiving); for every other window it
performs the normal kill.
.TP
.I $mod+m
Show / hide nchat (toggle it in and out of the scratchpad). Same action as the
waybar icon.
.TP
.I "Ctrl-v  Ctrl-r  Ctrl-t  Ctrl-f  Ctrl-q"
Inside nchat: open the selected attachment, download it, send a file, jump to the
unread chat, and quit. Quitting with Ctrl-q is a clean exit and does NOT trigger a
service restart.
.SH USAGE
.TP
.B Show / hide
Press
.I $mod+m
or click the WhatsApp icon in waybar. Pressing
.I $mod+Shift+q
while nchat is focused hides it again.
.TP
.B Read a voice note
Select the message (KeyUp) and press
.I Ctrl-v
\[em] the .oga plays through
.BR mpv (1)
with no window.
.TP
.B Send a file
.I Ctrl-t .
.TP
.B Act on a notification
Click it: nchat is pulled to the current workspace and jumps to the unread chat.
.SH FILES
.SS "Systemd unit"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/systemd/user/nchat.service
Runs
.I "foot --app-id=nchat -e nchat" .
.B Restart=on-failure
revives nchat on a crash/OOM but not on a clean Ctrl-q. Modeled on eww.service.
.SS "Sway scripts"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/scripts/close-or-scratchpad.sh
Bound to
.IR $mod+Shift+q .
Hides nchat to the scratchpad if focused, else runs the normal kill.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/scripts/nchat-toggle.sh
Bound to
.I $mod+m
and the waybar icon. Ensures the service is up, then toggles the scratchpad and
clears the unread badge.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/scripts/nchat-show.sh
Run by mako on notification click. Pulls nchat to the current workspace, focuses
it, clears the badge, and sends
.I Ctrl-f
(jump to unread) via
.BR wtype (1).
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/scripts/nchat-notify.sh
nchat's
.I desktop_notify_command .
Fires the notification AND lights the badge.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/scripts/nchat-waybar.sh
exec for the waybar module; emits the unread state as a CSS class.
.SS "Sway config"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/modes/default
Defines the intercepted
.I $mod+Shift+q
and the
.I $mod+m
binding.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/sway/config.d/98-application-defaults.conf
.I "for_window [app_id=\[dq]nchat\[dq]] move scratchpad"
\[em] nchat is born hidden.
.SS "Waybar"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
The
.I custom/nchat
module: WhatsApp glyph, exec nchat-waybar.sh, on-click nchat-toggle.sh, refreshed
by signal 10.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/waybar/style.css
.I #custom-nchat.unread
plus the
.I nchat-pulse
keyframe \[em] the red blink (color @error_color).
.SS "Mako"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/mako/config
.I [app-name=\[dq]nchat\[dq]]
maps the notification click to nchat-show.sh.
.SS "nchat config"
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/nchat/ui.conf
.I desktop_notify_enabled=1
and
.I desktop_notify_command
point at nchat-notify.sh.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/nchat/app.conf
.I attachment_prefetch=1
(download on message selection).
.SS "MIME handler"
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/share/applications/mpv-audio.desktop
Makes audio/ogg and friends open in
.I "mpv --no-video"
(no window). Audio is wired here, NOT in nchat, on purpose (see GOTCHAS).
.SS "Runtime"
.TP
.I /tmp/nchat-unread
Presence = unread. Touched by nchat-notify.sh, removed when nchat is shown.
.SH "NOTIFICATION FLOW"
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
Incoming message \[->] nchat runs
.I desktop_notify_command
.RI ( nchat-notify.sh ).
.IP \n+[step].
The script runs
.I "notify-send -a nchat"
(mako shows it),
.I "touch /tmp/nchat-unread" ,
and
.I "pkill -RTMIN+10 waybar" .
.IP \n+[step].
waybar re-execs nchat-waybar.sh, gets class
.IR unread ,
and CSS blinks the icon red.
.IP \n+[step].
Clicking the notification \[->] mako
.I [app-name=nchat]
\[->] nchat-show.sh \[->] nchat to current workspace + Ctrl-f + clear flag.
.SH "MEDIA FLOW"
.PP
A received voice note (.oga = Opus/Ogg, MIME audio/ogg) is fetched on selection,
opened with
.I Ctrl-v
\[->]
.BR xdg-open (1)
\[->]
.I mpv-audio.desktop
\[->]
.IR "mpv --no-video" .
.SH PROGRAMS
.BR nchat (1),
.BR foot (1),
.BR mpv (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR wtype (1),
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR makoctl (1)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B nchat-typing-log
Local fork of the WhatsApp TUI (whatsmeow), WhatsApp-only + typing-log patch; provides/conflicts nchat.
.TP
.B foot
Terminal that hosts the TUI under app_id nchat.
.TP
.B mpv
Plays received audio/video attachments.
.TP
.B jq
Parses the sway tree in the helper scripts.
.TP
.B wtype
Sends Ctrl-f into nchat after a notification click.
.TP
.B mako
Notification daemon that intercepts the click.
.SH GOTCHAS
.IP \[bu] 2
nchat REWRITES ui.conf and app.conf on exit. Edit them only with the service
stopped
.RI ( "systemctl --user stop nchat" ),
or the change is silently clobbered.
.IP \[bu] 2
Audio playback is wired via the system MIME handler (mpv-audio.desktop), NOT
nchat's
.I attachment_open_command
\[em] precisely because that key gets clobbered (above). The default xdg-open
sent audio/ogg to Firefox.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Restart=on-failure
(not always): a clean Ctrl-q (exit 0) does NOT revive nchat; a crash/OOM does.
"Minimize" means scratchpad, not Ctrl-q.
.IP \[bu] 2
waybar glyphs are JSON hex escapes (e.g.
.IR \[rs]uf232 ),
not literal Private-Use characters. Edit via a Python script if unsure \[em] the
editor may swap escape and glyph, and a raw write can drop PUA.
.IP \[bu] 2
.I $mod+Shift+q
is intercepted by a script that defaults to
.I kill
if jq fails, so the normal close behavior is preserved for every other window.
.IP \[bu] 2
Built WhatsApp-only
.RI ( "cmake -DHAS_TELEGRAM=OFF -DHAS_DUMMY=OFF" )
to avoid compiling tdlib (~8 GB RAM). A
.I "paru -Syu"
may offer to rebuild the full AUR package \[em] keep it WhatsApp-only.
.IP \[bu] 2
nchat has no CLI to open a chat by name, so the notification click uses
.I Ctrl-f
(jump to unread). It lands on the right chat only when it is the sole unread one.
.IP \[bu] 2
.I "notify-send -a nchat"
is required so mako can match
.IR [app-name=nchat] ;
without it the app-name is the generic "notify-send".
.IP \[bu] 2
The badge uses waybar signal
.B SIGRTMIN+10
(free; 3\-9 and 11\-17 were taken).
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Replaces Altus (Electron, ~4.6 G profile, OOM-killed). nchat's profile is ~57 M;
raw attachments live in
.I profiles/<account>/tmp/
and are not auto-pruned.
.IP \[bu] 2
Two WhatsApp accounts live in one nchat config and share a single chat list.
.IP \[bu] 2
The binary is a local fork
.B nchat-typing-log
(provides/conflicts nchat) built from
.IR ~/.local/src/nchat-typing-log/ ;
a
.I "paru -Syu"
will not replace it. Rebase
.I 0001-typing-log.patch
if a new nchat release moves the ReceiveTypingNotify case.
.SH "TYPING LOG"
A local patch records every typing/idle event a contact sends, to
.IR ~/tmp/nchat-typing.log .
Each line is tab-separated:
.RS
.nf
timestamp  flag  name  number  typing|idle
.fi
.RE
.PP
The patch appends in the
.I ReceiveTypingNotify
handler of
.IR src/uimodel.cpp ,
resolving the contact name with
.I GetContactName
right there \[em] safe, because the notification handler in the same
.I MessageHandler
already calls it without deadlock \[em] then mapping the account to a flag and
extracting the number. The log line is already human-readable; just
.IR "tail -f" .
Both
.I typing
and
.I idle
are recorded, so the gap measures how long the contact typed.
.PP
The per-account flag matters because the same number can be saved under a
different name in each account's address book. A helper
.BR nchat-typing-names.sh ( ~/.scripts/ )
exists but is now redundant since the log is pre-resolved \[em] useful only if the
patch is reverted.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR nchat (1),
.BR scratchpad (1),
.BR mako (5),
.BR waybar (5),
.BR foot (1)
