.TH WINDOW\-TITLE 1 "2026\-03\-03" "dotfiles" "Window Title Manual"
.SH NAME
window\-title \- smart window title display for sway/waybar
.SH DESCRIPTION
The window title functionality displays the focused window's
.I location
and
.I context
as a formatted string in a waybar module, updating automatically on every
window focus or title change.
.PP
For terminal windows, the display format is:
.PP
.RS
.I location\fR:\fI context
.RE
.PP
where
.I location
is the working directory (e.g.\&
.BR ~ ,
.BR ~/projects/foo )
and
.I context
is the foreground command or application description
(e.g.\&
.BR nvim ,
.BR "Claude Code" ).
For non-terminal windows the full window title is shown.
.PP
A persistent background daemon
.RB ( window\-title.sh )
subscribes to sway IPC events via a single long-lived
.BR jq (1)
process.
On each window focus or title event it extracts location and context using
shell builtins only (no
.BR grep / sed
per event), writes an atomic JSON cache to
.IR /tmp ,
and signals waybar to refresh.
.SH DISPLAY FORMAT
.TP
.B Terminal windows (footclient)
Location is extracted from the title (set by foot as
.IR "path [PID]" )
or resolved via
.BR pstree (1)
process traversal as a fallback.
Context is the foreground command or the description after the
.B ✳\
prefix (e.g.\& Claude Code).
The last known location is cached per window ID so it survives a foreground
process overriding the terminal title.
.TP
.B Other terminal emulators
Similar location resolution, using process CWD via
.B /proc
as the primary source.
.TP
.B Non-terminal windows
The full window title is displayed as-is.
.TP
.B Truncation
Titles longer than 60 characters are truncated.
For
.IR "path: context"
format the path is preserved and the context is truncated with
.BR ... .
.SH INTERACTIONS
.TP
.B Waybar left\-click
Flashes the human-readable app name (e.g.\&
.BR "Foot terminal" ,
.BR "Brave Browser" )
for 3 seconds, then restores the title automatically.
A second left-click dismisses the flash immediately.
.TP
.B Waybar right\-click
Opens a rofi text input to assign a custom context label to the focused
window.
The input is pre-filled with the current context so edits are incremental.
See
.B CUSTOM LABELS
below.
.TP
.B Waybar hover (tooltip)
Shows the application
.B app_id
on the first line and the raw window title on the second line.
.SH CUSTOM LABELS
Right-clicking the waybar module opens a rofi prompt positioned just below
the bar (centered, north anchor).
.PP
.TP
.B Assign a label
Type the desired context label (e.g.\&
.BR "eww widgets" ,
.BR "func-doc session" )
and press
.BR Enter .
The display becomes
.IR "location: your\-label" ,
preserving the current location prefix.
.TP
.B Clear a label
Open the prompt and submit an empty string (delete all text, then
.BR Enter ).
The module reverts to the automatically computed title.
.TP
.B Cancel
Press
.B Escape
or close rofi — no change is made.
.PP
Custom labels are keyed by sway window ID and persist for the lifetime of
that window (session only; cleared on window close or sway restart).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/window\-title.sh
Main daemon.
Subscribes to sway IPC, processes every window/workspace event, writes the
JSON cache, and signals waybar.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/window\-title\-output.sh
Thin reader invoked by waybar on each signal refresh.
Checks click-override expiry and outputs the cached JSON.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/window\-title\-click.sh
Left-click handler.
Writes a timed override file and signals waybar to show the app name for
3 seconds.
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/scripts/window\-title\-rename.sh
Right-click handler.
Opens rofi, reads or clears the custom label for the focused window,
and updates the JSON cache immediately.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waybar/config.jsonc
Waybar module definition
.RI ( custom/window\-title ,
signal\ 10).
Binds
.B on\-click
and
.BR on\-click\-right .
.TP
.I ~/.config/sway/config.d/99\-autostart\-applications.conf
Launches
.B window\-title.sh
at sway startup via
.BR exec_always .
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGRTMIN+10
Sent to
.B waybar
after every title update to trigger a module refresh.
.TP
.B SIGUSR1
Sent to
.B window\-title.sh
by
.B window\-title\-rename.sh
when a custom label is cleared.
Triggers
.B bootstrap()
to re-read the current focused window and restore the computed title.
.SH PROGRAMS
.TP
.B swaymsg
Sway IPC client.
Used to subscribe to events and query the window tree.
.TP
.B jq
JSON processor.
One persistent process parses all incoming IPC events for the daemon lifetime.
.TP
.B pstree
Process tree inspection.
Used as a fallback to resolve terminal working directory from the process
hierarchy when the title does not contain a path.
.TP
.B pgrep / pkill
Process search and signaling.
Used for the single-instance guard (PID file) and for sending RTMIN+10 to
waybar.
.TP
.B rofi
Launcher used as the text-input UI for the rename prompt.
.SH DAEMON
.B window\-title.sh
is started by sway via
.B exec_always
in
.IR 99\-autostart\-applications.conf ,
meaning it is automatically restarted on every
.BR "swaymsg reload" .
.PP
A PID file at
.I /tmp/waybar\-window\-title\-$USER.pid
ensures only one instance runs at a time: on startup the script kills any
previous instance recorded in the PID file before writing its own PID.
.PP
The event loop uses a single persistent
.B jq
subprocess to parse sway IPC output.
All string extraction (path, context, CSS class) uses shell parameter
expansion, spawning no external processes per event for the common case.
.SH STORAGE
All runtime files are in
.I /tmp
and are not persisted across reboots.
.TP
.I /tmp/waybar\-window\-title\-$USER.json
JSON cache read by
.B window\-title\-output.sh
on every waybar refresh.
Written atomically via a
.I .tmp
rename.
.TP
.I /tmp/waybar\-window\-title\-$USER.pid
PID file for the single-instance guard.
.TP
.I /tmp/waybar\-window\-locations\-$USER/<id>.cache
Per-window working directory cache, keyed by sway window ID.
Files older than 1 day are pruned periodically.
.TP
.I /tmp/waybar\-window\-names\-$USER/<id>.name
Per-window custom context labels set via right-click rename.
Cleared automatically when the window closes (file is simply absent for
uncustomized windows).
.TP
.I /tmp/waybar\-window\-title\-override\-$USER
Timed override written by
.B window\-title\-click.sh
to flash the app name.
Contains the display text on line 1 and the Unix expiry timestamp on line 2.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR swaymsg (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR rofi (1),
.BR pstree (1),
.BR waybar (5)
